30The United Nations
Human Rights Treaty System
Fact Sheet No.
Rev.1

The United Nations  
Human Rights T reaty System
Fact Sheet No. 30/Rev .1
UNITED NA TIONS  
New Y ork and Geneva, 2012
IINOTE
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this pub -
lication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part 
of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimita -
tion of its frontiers or boundaries.
*
* *
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com -
bined with figures. Mention of such a figure indicates a reference to a United 
Nations document.
IIICONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION  ...................................................................... 1
Chapters
I. DEVELOPING HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS: THE TREATIES 
AND THEIR OPTIONAL PROTOCOLS  ..................................... 3
A. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)  .................. 3
B. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination (1965)  .......................................... 5
C. International Bill of Human Rights  .................................... 6
D. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms  
of Discrimination against Women (1979)  ......................... 9
E. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman  
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984)  ................. 10
F. Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989)  .................. 12
G. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights  
of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families 
(1990)  .................................................................... 14
H. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  
(2006)  .................................................................... 15
I. International Convention for the Protection of  
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (2006)  ............ 16
J. Reading the treaties as a whole  .................................... 18
II. IMPLEMENTATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS:  
THE TREATY BODIES  ......................................................... 19
A. What are the human rights treaty bodies?  ...................... 19
B. What do the human rights treaty bodies do?  ................... 21
C. Consideration of State parties’ reports  ........................... 21
D. Consideration of complaints from individuals  ................... 30
IVE. Inquiries  ................................................................... 32
F. Urgent action and urgent appeals to the General  
Assembly under the International Convention for the  
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance  .....33
G. Early warning and urgent action by the Committee on the  
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination  ............... 34
H. Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and 
the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture ....................... 34
I. Inter-State communications  ........................................... 35
J. General comments  ..................................................... 36
K. Days of general discussion/thematic debates  .................. 37
L. Meetings of State parties and meetings with State  
parties  ..................................................................... 37
M. Coordination among the treaty bodies  ........................... 37
III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS 
TREATY SYSTEM  ............................................................... 40
A. The expansion of the human rights treaty system and the 
need for strengthening it  .............................................. 40
B. The role and interaction of civil society and national  
human rights institutions with the treaty body system  .......... 43
C. The contribution of the universal periodic review to the 
work of the treaty bodies  ............................................. 44
D. The contribution of the special procedures to the work of 
the treaty bodies  ........................................................ 44
E. More information about the United Nations human rights 
treaty system  ............................................................. 45
Annexes
II. Glossary of technical terms related to the treaty bodies  ............. 47
II. How a State becomes a party to a treaty  .............................. 58
1INTRODUCTION
This Fact Sheet provides a general introduction to the core international  
human rights treaties and the committees, or “treaty bodies”, that monitor 
their implementation by State parties.1 The nine core international human 
rights treaties covered in this Fact Sheet set international standards for the 
protection and promotion of human rights to which States can subscribe by 
becoming a party. These treaties are:
•	 The	International	 Convention	 on	the	Elimination	 of	All	Forms	of	Racial	
Discrimination;
•	 The	International	Covenant	on	Economic,	Social	and	Cultural	Rights;
•	 The	International	Covenant	on	Civil	and	Political	Rights;
•	 The	Convention	 on	the	Elimination	 of	All	Forms	of	Discrimination	
against Women;
•	 The	Convention	 against	Torture	and	Other	Cruel,	Inhuman	 or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
•	 The	Convention	on	the	Rights	of	the	Child;
•	 The	International	 Convention	 on	the	Protection	 of	the	Rights	of	All	
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families;
•	 The	Convention	on	the	Rights	of	Persons	with	Disabilities;
•	 The	International	 Convention	 for	the	Protection	 of	All	Persons	from	
Enforced Disappearance.
Each State party has an obligation to take steps to ensure that everyone 
in the State can enjoy the rights set out in the treaty. The treaty body helps 
them to do this by monitoring implementation and recommending further 
action. Although each treaty is a separate legal instrument, which States 
may or may not choose to accept, and each treaty body is a commit -
tee of experts independent from the others, this Fact Sheet presents them 
as the United Nations human rights “treaty system”. The extent to which 
the treaties and the treaty bodies can function together as a system de -
pends on two factors: first, States need to accept all the core internation -
al human rights treaties systematically and put their provisions into opera -
tion (universal and effective ratification); and, second, the treaty bodies 
1 It has become accepted to describe the committees established under the treaties as the human 
rights “treaty bodies”, even though the provisions of each treaty refer exclusively to its “com -
mittee”. It should be noted that the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is not 
technically a treaty body, since it was not established directly under the terms of the Covenant 
but was created by Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/17.
2need to coordinate their activities so as to present a consistent and sys -
tematic approach to monitoring the implementation of human rights at the  
national level.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR) has published specific fact sheets on most of the international 
treaties and treaty bodies referred to here. Those interested in a particular 
treaty or treaty body should refer to them (see list at the end). The present 
Fact Sheet takes a more general approach: surveying all the treaties and 
treaty bodies to see to what extent they can, and do, function together as 
a single, holistic and integrated system for the promotion and protection 
of human rights.
Chapter I presents the nine core international human rights treaties currently 
in force and their optional protocols. These treaties are the product of more 
than half a century of continuous elaboration since the adoption of the Uni -
versal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations General Assembly 
in 1948.
Chapter II presents the work of the ten2 human rights treaty bodies estab -
lished under the terms of these treaties. These treaty bodies monitor the 
implementation of the rights set out in the treaties by the States that have ac -
cepted them. The treaty body system constitutes a key mechanism through 
which States are obliged to engage, at an international forum, in a rigor -
ous, but constructive, dialogue on the state of human rights implementation 
in their countries. All of the treaty bodies are considered together, concen -
trating on the common elements of their mandates and working methods, 
but also outlining some major differences. Further details on their practical 
differences can be found in the specific fact sheets.
Chapter III surveys the challenges facing the human rights treaty sys -
tem. It considers efforts to make the system more effective, in particular 
by streamlining the reporting procedure. The implications for the treaty  
system of the new emphasis on the creation of and support to national pro -
tection systems are also discussed.
A glossary of technical terms is also provided to assist readers with the termi -
nology used in relation to the treaties and the treaty bodies.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights makes it clear that all human rights 
are indivisible and interrelated, and equal importance should be attached to 
each and every right. All States are committed to promoting respect for the 
2 One for each of the nine treaties plus the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, established 
by the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. 
3rights and freedoms set out in the Declaration and to taking measures, both 
nationally and internationally, to secure their universal and effective recogni -
tion and observance. The nine international human rights treaties constitute a 
comprehensive legal framework within which States can, with the support of 
the treaty bodies, meet that commitment.
I. DEVELOPING HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS: 
THE TREATIES AND THEIR OPTIONAL  
PROTOCOLS
In the early twentieth century, the protection of human rights became an 
issue of concern to the international community. Under the League of Na -
tions, established at the end of the First World War, attempts were made to 
develop an international legal framework, along with international monitor -
ing mechanisms, to protect minorities. The horrors perpetrated during the 
Second World War motivated the international community to ensure that 
such atrocities would never be repeated and provided the impetus for the 
modern movement to establish an international system of binding human 
rights protection.
A. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)
The Charter of the United Nations of 1945 proclaims that one of the 
purposes of the United Nations is to promote and encourage respect for  
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. With the energetic sup -
port of Eleanor Roosevelt, alongside figures such as René Cassin, Charles 
Malik, Peng Chun Chang and John Humphrey, States sought to set out 
in a single document, for the first time, the range of fundamental rights 
and freedoms that belonged to all by virtue of their status as human be -
ings. These efforts resulted in the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, adopted by the General 
Assembly on 10 December 1948, 
henceforth Human Rights Day. This 
document, expressed as “a com -
mon standard of achievement for 
all peoples and all nations”, sets 
out a wide span of rights cover -
ing all aspects of life. Its article 
1 famously describes the idea of 
fundamental human rights: “All 
human beings are born free and 
equal in dignity and rights.” The Declaration as customary  
international law?
It is widely accepted that some of the 
Declaration’s provisions are now rules 
of customary international law. Exam -
ples include the bans on torture and on 
racial discrimination. These are norms 
which, through the practice of States, 
have come to be seen as legally bind -
ing rules, well before their incorpora -
tion in specific treaties. Indeed, some 
commentators argue that the entire 
Declaration possesses this status.
4The United Nations human rights treaty system
International Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination  (1965)International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (1966)International Covenant 
on Civil and Political 
Rights (1966)
Committee on the Elimination 
of Racial DiscriminationCommittee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights Committee on the
Elimination of  
Discrimination against 
WomenCommittee against
TortureCommittee on the 
Rights of the Child Committee on the Protection 
of the Rights of All Migrant 
Workers and Members of 
Their Families Committee on the Rights 
of Persons with 
DisabilitiesCommittee on Enforced 
DisappearancesSubcommittee 
on Prevention 
of TortureConvention on the Rights 
of Persons with 
Disabilities (2006)Convention on the 
Rights of the Child 
(1989)
Optional
Protocol
(1999)Optional
Protocol
(2008)Optional
Protocol
(1966)
Optional
Protocol
(1989)Optional
Protocol
(2002)
Optional
Protocol
(2011)Optional
Protocol
(2000)
Optional
Protocol
(2006)Convention against 
Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or 
Punishment (1984)Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against 
Women (1979)International Convention on 
the Protection of the Rights of 
All Migrant Workers and 
Members of their Families 
(1990)International Convention 
for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced 
Disappearance (2006)
Human Rights 
CommitteeOptional
Protocol
(2000)
5After setting out a general prohibition of discrimination, the Declaration 
enumerates specific groups of rights: civil, cultural, economic, political and 
social. Articles 3 to 21 describe classic civil and political rights (including 
the right to asylum and the right to property). Articles 22 to 28 guarantee 
a range of economic, social and cultural rights, with the important recog -
nition in article 28 that: “Everyone 
has the right to a social and interna -
tional order in which the rights and 
freedoms set forth in this Declara -
tion can be fully realized.”
While the Declaration is, as its 
name suggests, not a directly le -
gally binding treaty, its importance 
should not be underestimated. It is 
of high moral force, representing 
as it does the first internationally 
agreed definition of the rights of 
all people, adopted in the shadow 
of a period of massive violations 
of the rights it describes. The Dec -
laration also laid the groundwork 
for the treaty structure that emerged 
in the following decades. More-
over, by comprehensively draw -
ing together the different types of 
rights, the Declaration emphasizes 
the commonality, interrelatedness 
and interdependence of all rights, 
a fundamental point reaffirmed 
many years later in the 1993  
Vienna Declaration of the World 
Conference on Human Rights.
B. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Racial Discrimination (1965)
When the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted, broad 
agreement already existed that the rights it contained should be translated 
into legal form as treaties, which would directly bind those States that agreed 
to their terms. This led to extended negotiations in the Commission on Human 
Rights, a political body composed of State representatives, which until 2006 Non-discrimination in the  
enjoyment of human rights
All the core human rights treaties reflect 
the general principle of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights that the 
rights they set out should be enjoyed 
without distinction of any kind. Article 
2 of the Declaration sets out a non-
exhaustive list of prohibited grounds for 
discrimination:
•	Race	or	colour;
•	Sex;
•	Language;
•	Religion;
•	Political	or	other	opinion;
•	National	or	social	origin;
•	Property,	birth	or	other	status.
The same list is included in article 2 
of both Covenants. Subsequent treaties 
have expanded the list further. Three 
are specifically aimed at eliminating 
certain forms of discrimination: racial 
discrimination, discrimination against 
women and discrimination against per -
sons with disabilities.
6met annually in Geneva to discuss a wide variety of human rights issues.3 
Given the political imperatives of the day arising from the apartheid regime 
in South Africa, the first treaty to be agreed, the International Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, dealt with the specific 
phenomenon of racial discrimination. It was adopted by the General As -
sembly in December 1965.
After defining racial discrimination, the Convention sets out in six detailed 
articles the obligations of State parties to combat this scourge. As well as the 
obvious requirements that the State itself, at all levels, must refrain from such 
acts, the Convention also requires a 
State to take appropriate measures 
against racial discrimination rooted 
in society, including the propaga -
tion of racist ideas advocated by 
groups and organizations. The 
Convention also sets out an ex -
tensive series of specific human 
rights—in the civil and political and 
in the economic, social and cultural 
spheres, most of which are enumer -
ated in the Declaration—that must 
be guaranteed without distinction 
on racial grounds. Finally, the Convention establishes as a basic right an 
effective remedy, whether through the courts or other institutions, against acts 
of racial discrimination.
The Convention, in part II, requires all State parties to report periodically to 
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the measures 
they have taken to give effect to the Convention. Under article 14, States 
may also choose to recognize the Committee’s competence to consider com -
plaints from individuals, while a system of inter-State complaints is set out in 
articles 11, 12 and 13.
C. International Bill of Human Rights
As the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination was being agreed, negotiations were continuing on two 
other major treaties: the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
The process of drafting a legally binding instrument enshrining the rights of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had started immediately after 
3 The Commission has since been replaced by the Human Rights Council, which meets three 
times a year (General Assembly resolution 60/251).What is racial discrimination? 
“Any distinction, exclusion, restriction 
or preference based on race, colour, 
descent, or national or ethnic origin 
which has the purpose or effect of nul -
lifying or impairing the recognition, en -
joyment or exercise, on an equal foot -
ing, of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in the political, economic, so -
cial, cultural or any other field of public 
life” (art. 1).
7the Declaration’s adoption in 1948. Initially, a single covenant encompass -
ing all human rights was envisaged. However, after long discussion, the 
General Assembly requested the Commission on Human Rights to draw up 
two separate covenants, specifying that the two instruments should contain 
as many similar provisions as possible to “emphasize the unity of the aim 
in view”.4 The two Covenants were ultimately adopted by the General As -
sembly in December 1966 and entered into force in 1976. Together with 
the Universal Declaration, the Covenants are referred to as the International 
Bill of Human Rights.
The two Covenants have a similar structure and some of their articles adopt 
the same, or very similar, wording. The preambles to both recognize the in -
terdependence of all human rights, stating that the human rights ideal can be 
achieved only if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy their 
economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights. Part I of both Covenants, 
on the right of all peoples to self-determination and to freely dispose of their 
natural wealth and resources, is identical. In both, part II sets out general 
provisions prohibiting discrimination and asserting the equal rights of men 
and women with regard to the enjoyment of the rights set forth in each 
Covenant, as well as the permissible limitations on such enjoyment. Part III 
of each Covenant contains the substantive provisions, which elaborate on 
rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
1. International Covenant  
 on Economic, Social and  
 Cultural Rights (1966)
The International Covenant on Eco -
nomic, Social and Cultural Rights 
develops the corresponding rights 
in the Universal Declaration in 
considerable detail, specifying the 
steps required for their full realiza -
tion. For example, on the right to 
education, it mirrors the language 
of the Universal Declaration of Hu -
man Rights, but devotes articles 13 
and 14 to its different dimensions, 
specifying the obligation to secure 
compulsory primary education free 
of charge and to take steps towards 
achieving free secondary and   
4 Resolution 543 (VI), para. 1.Key economic, social and  
cultural rights:
•	 Right	to	non-discrimination
•	 Right	to	work
•	 Just	and	favourable	conditions	of	
work
•	 Trade	union	rights
•	 Right	to	social	security
•	 Protection	of	the	family
•	 Right	to	an	adequate	standard	of  
living
•	 Right	to	health
•	 Right	to	education
•	 Right	to	participate	in	cultural	life
8higher education. The right to health, which the Declaration covers as part 
of an adequate standard of living, has a separate article in the Covenant: 
article 12 recognizes the right to the highest attainable standard of physical 
and mental health, and includes specific health-related issues such as envi -
ronmental hygiene and epidemic and occupational diseases. Article 6 on 
the right to work is complemented by article 7, elaborating the right to just 
and favourable conditions of work, providing for health and safety at work, 
equal opportunities for promotion and remuneration for public holidays. 
One notable difference between the two Covenants is the principle of pro -
gressive realization in part II of the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights. Its article 2 (1) specifies that a State party “un -
dertakes to take steps, […] to the maximum of its available resources, with 
a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights recognized 
in [the Covenant]”. The principle of progressive realization acknowledges 
the financial constraints State parties may face. However, it also imposes 
an immediate obligation to take deliberate, concrete and targeted steps 
towards the full realization of the rights of the Covenant. The Covenant also 
recognizes the wider role of the international community (arts. 2 (1), 11 (2), 
15 (4), 22 and 23), building on the principles in articles 22 and 28 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Part IV requires all State parties to report periodically to the Economic and 
Social Council. In 1985, the Council created the Committee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights to receive reports from State parties on the mea -
sures they have taken to give effect to the Covenant and the progress they 
have made.5 
Its Optional Protocol , of 2008, enables State parties to accept additional 
procedures. It establishes a fully fledged complaint procedure, including in -
dividual petitions, inquiries and inter-State complaints.
2. International Covenant on Civil and  
Political Rights (1966)
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, like the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, elaborates the civil and 
political rights set out in the Declaration, with the exception of the right to 
property and the right to asylum (which was covered separately in the 1951 
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees). It also includes additional 
rights, such as the rights of detainees (art. 10) and the protection of minori -
ties (art. 27).
5 Resolution 1985/17.
9In addition to articles 2 (1) and 3 on non-discrimination (which are mirrored 
in arts. 2 (2) and 3 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights), article 26 ensures equality before the law and non-discrimi -
natory protection of the law generally in force in a State. In addition, like the 
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimina -
tion, article 2 provides for the right to an effective remedy for violations of 
Covenant rights, including an independent and impartial forum before which 
allegations of such violations can be brought. The Covenant then covers the 
key civil and political rights and freedoms. Its article 25 guarantees the right 
freely to take part in public affairs, particularly through fair and periodic 
elections.
The Covenant, in part IV, requires all State parties to report periodically to 
the Human Rights Committee.
Two Optional Protocols supplement the Covenant and allow State parties to 
accept additional obligations. The first Optional Protocol, of 1966, provides 
for a right to individual petition; the second, of 1989, promotes the abolition 
of the death penalty.
D. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms  
of Discrimination against Women (1979)
In 1979, the international community adopted a new treaty to address dis -
crimination against women on the basis of sex. Sex discrimination, like ra -
cial discrimination, is proscribed under the two Covenants in general terms. 
However, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women sets out in more detail what is meant by sex discrimination 
from the perspective of equality between women and men. It addresses a 
range of programmatic and policy aspects.
The Convention’s format was mod -
elled on that of the International 
Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 
but contained a number of innova -
tions, reflecting developments in the 
15 years since the latter had been 
adopted. The Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimi -
nation against Women, too, begins 
by defining discrimination on the ba -
sis of sex. The initial articles oblige 
State parties both to refrain from What is discrimination against 
women? 
“Any distinction, exclusion or restriction 
made on the basis of sex which has the 
effect or purpose of impairing or nullify -
ing the recognition, enjoyment or ex -
ercise by women, irrespective of their 
marital status, on a basis of equality of 
men and women, of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in the political, 
economic, social, cultural, civil or any 
other field” (art. 1).
10 sex-based discrimination in their own dealings and to take measures towards 
achieving factual as well as legal equality in all spheres of life, including 
by breaking down discriminatory attitudes, customs and practices in society. 
Article 6 explicitly requires them to suppress all forms of trafficking in women 
and exploitation of prostitution, even though these phenomena may implicitly 
fall within the prohibition of slavery and forced labour covered by other 
instruments. Articles 7 and 8 detail obligations to ensure equal participation 
of women and men in public and political life. Articles 9 and 10 expand 
on equality in relation to nationality and education, while articles 11, 12 
and 13 elaborate on women’s rights to employment, health and other ar -
eas of economic and social life. Applying general principles to a particular 
situation, article 14 is the only provision in human rights treaties to address 
the particular problems faced by women in rural areas. Articles 15 and 16 
expand on the right to equality before the law and in marriage and family 
relations.
The Convention, in part V, requires all State parties to report periodically to 
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the 
measures they have taken to give effect to the Convention.
Its Optional Protocol  enables State parties to accept individual petitions and 
inquiry procedures.
E. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman  
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984)
In 1984, another treaty was adopt -
ed to deal with torture and other 
ill-treatment. Article 7 of the Interna -
tional Covenant on Civil and Politi -
cal Rights already banned torture 
and cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment, but the 
Convention goes much further and 
develops a legal scheme aimed at 
both preventing and punishing these 
practices. After defining torture, the 
Convention against Torture and 
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrad -
ing Treatment or Punishment makes 
clear that no circumstances of any 
kind, including orders from a supe -
rior, can justify an act of torture—the 
ban is absolute. Closely related to What is torture?
“Any act by which severe pain or 
suffering, whether physical or men -
tal, is intentionally inflicted on a 
person for such purposes as ob -
taining from him or a third person 
information or a confession, pun -
ishing him for an act he or a third 
person committed or is suspected of 
having committed, or intimidating  
or coercing him or a third person, 
or for any reason based on discrimi -
nation of any kind, when such pain  
or suffering is inflicted by or at the 
instigation of or with the consent  
or acquiescence of a public official 
or other person acting in an official 
capacity” (art. 1).
11this is the key provision, in article 3, on “non-refoulement”: if there are substan -
tial grounds for believing that an individual will be tortured in a country, that 
person cannot be extradited, deported or otherwise returned to that country. 
A State party must criminalize torture and punish it appropriately.
As acts of torture need to be punished even if the perpetrators have fled 
abroad, articles 4 to 9 establish a scheme whereby a State in which torture 
is committed or whose nationals are involved as perpetrators or victims has 
jurisdiction over the crime. Such a State can ask for the extradition of the al -
leged offender from any other country, which must itself submit the alleged of -
fender for prosecution if it turns down the request for extradition. The aim is to 
ensure that there is no place to hide for the perpetrators of the acts prohibited 
by the treaty. Articles 10 and 11 cover the education of law enforcement 
personnel and the systematic review of their methods to prevent torture. In -
stead of a general “right to an effective remedy” for violations, as contained 
in other treaties, the Convention against Torture sets out, in articles 12 to 14, 
rights to prompt and impartial investigations of allegations of torture, with 
fair and adequate compensation as well as full rehabilitation being due to a 
victim. According to article 15, evidence gathered through torture cannot be 
used in court. Finally, article 16 requires State parties to prevent acts of cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that do not amount to torture.
The Convention, in Part II, requires each State party to report periodically to 
the Committee against Torture. Under articles 21 and 22, States may also 
choose to accept the Committee’s competence to consider complaints from 
other State parties and from individuals.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment  was adopted in 2002 
and entered into force in June 2006. It provides for a system of regular visits 
by international and national mechanisms to prevent torture and other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of people who are deprived 
of their liberty. It establishes the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture as the 
international preventive mechanism with a global remit and requires each 
State party to set up, designate or maintain one or several national preven -
tive mechanisms or visiting bodies for the prevention of torture and other 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. As provided for under 
article 11, the Subcommittee:
(a) Visits places where people are or may be deprived of their liberty;
(b) Advises and assists State parties establishing national preventive 
mechanisms, when necessary; maintains direct contact with these 
mechanisms in evaluating the needs and the means necessary to im -
prove safeguards against ill-treatment; and makes recommendations 
12and observations to State parties with a view to strengthening the 
capacity and mandate of the national preventive mechanisms; and
(c) Cooperates with relevant United Nations bodies as well as interna -
tional, regional and national bodies for the prevention of ill-treatment.
F. Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989)
The first treaty to deal comprehensively with the rights of children was the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child. While children, as human beings 
under 18 years of age, of course 
enjoy all of the human rights set 
out in the other treaties, restating 
these rights in a single compre -
hensive document with emphasis 
on the particular circumstances 
of children and the conditions 
required for them to enjoy their 
rights provided an opportunity to 
develop additional provisions rel -
evant to them.
Both article 24 of the Internation -
al Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and article 10 of the Inter -
national Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights provide 
that children are entitled to any 
special measures of protection that 
they require as children. The Con -
vention on the Rights of the Child 
sets out these measures in much 
greater detail. For example, par -
ticular provisions cover the child’s 
right to an identity (arts. 7 and 8), 
separation from parents (art. 9), 
family reunification (art. 10), the 
illicit transfer of children (art.11), 
protection from abuse (art. 19) 
and adoption (art. 21). Article 22 
addresses the particular situation 
of child refugees. Recognizing the 
particular vulnerabilities of chil -Four “general principles” for  
implementing children’s rights
The Committee on the Rights of the 
Child has identified four general prin -
ciples contained in the Convention 
which should guide the way States im -
plement children’s rights:
1. Non-discrimination : the obliga -
tion of States to respect and ensure 
the rights set forth in the Convention to 
each child within their jurisdiction with -
out discrimination of any kind (art. 2);
2. The best interests of the child : that 
the best interests of the child should be 
a primary consideration in all actions 
concerning the child (art. 3);
3. The right to life, survival and de -
velopment : the child’s inherent right to 
life and State parties’ obligation to en -
sure to the maximum extent possible the 
survival and development of the child 
(art. 6);
4. The views of the child about his 
or her own situation : the child’s right 
to express his or her views freely in 
“all matters affecting the child”, those 
views being given due weight “in ac -
cordance with the age and maturity of 
the child” (art. 12).
For more information, see the Commit -
tee’s general comment No. 5 (2003).
13dren, the Convention explicitly stipulates their protection from economic 
exploitation (art. 32), drug abuse (art. 33), sexual exploitation (art. 34), 
and abduction, sale and trafficking (art. 35). Article 23 provides particu -
larly for the care of children with disabilities. Article 38 reaffirms States’ 
obligations in armed conflict under international humanitarian law, and 
requires them not to recruit and, where possible, not to use children under 
15 years of age as soldiers in conflict.
Beyond the provisions that assert children’s rights in terms of protection, the 
Convention broke new ground by elaborating the child’s perspective with 
regard to the “classic” civil and political rights and economic, social and cul -
tural rights set out in the two Covenants. The Convention recognizes children 
as subjects of rights capable of exercising their own rights in accordance 
with their evolving capacity, age and maturity. For example, children have 
full rights to freedom of expression (art. 13), to freedom of thought, con -
science and religion (art. 14), to free association and peaceful assembly 
(art. 15), to privacy (art. 16), to access to information (art. 17), as well as 
to health (art. 24), social security (art. 26) and an adequate standard of 
living (art. 27).
The Convention, in part II, requires all State parties to report periodically to 
the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
The involvement of children in armed conflict, the sale of children, child pros -
titution and child pornography are covered in more detail in two optional 
protocols to the Convention, adopted in 2000.
The Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed  
conflict  complements article 38 of the Convention as well as international 
humanitarian law. It establishes that no person under the age of 18 shall 
be subject to compulsory recruitment into regular armed forces (art. 2) and 
imposes an obligation on States to raise the minimum age for voluntary 
recruitment further (art. 3). Upon ratification of, or accession to, the Op -
tional Protocol, State parties must deposit a binding declaration stating 
their minimum age for voluntary recruitment and the safeguards in place to 
ensure that recruitment is voluntary. State parties to the Protocol shall also 
ensure that members of their armed forces under 18 years of age do not 
take a direct part in hostilities (art. 1). In addition, armed groups distinct 
from the armed forces of a State should not, under any circumstances, 
recruit or use in hostilities persons under the age of 18. State parties are 
required to take all feasible measures to prevent the recruitment and use 
of children by such groups, including the criminalization of such practices 
(art. 4).
14The Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child por -
nography  extends the measures that State parties must take to protect chil -
dren from these violations of their human rights. The Optional Protocol not 
only defines the sale of children, child pornography and child prostitution 
(art. 2), but also provides a non-exhaustive list of acts and activities that 
State parties must criminalize (art. 3). This criminalization should also cover 
attempts to commit such acts or activities and complicity and participation in 
them. Articles 4 and 5 set forth the basis for State parties to assert jurisdiction 
over actionable practices relating to the sale of children, child prostitution 
and child pornography (including extraterritorial legislation) and provides for 
the extradition of alleged offenders. Based on the principle of the best inter -
ests of the child, the Optional Protocol also sets forth provisions for protecting 
and assisting child victims during all stages of the criminal justice process 
(art. 8). In addition, preventive measures against the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography, as well as redress, rehabilitation and re -
covery of child victims, are foreseen in articles 8 and 9. For the implementa -
tion of all these provisions, the Optional Protocol asks for close collaboration 
among State parties (arts. 6 and 10).
Finally, the Optional Protocol on a communications procedure  was adopted 
by the General Assembly in December 2011 and will be open for signature 
in 2012. It establishes the right to individual petition, inquiries and inter-State 
complaints.
G. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights 
of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families 
(1990)
The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant 
Workers and Members of their Families) was adopted in December 1990. 
It applies to the entire migration process, from preparation for migration, 
departure and transit to the total period of stay and remunerated activity in 
the State of employment and the return to the State of origin or of habitual 
residence. Most rights are relevant to the receiving State, although the send -
ing State also has specific obligations.
The Convention begins with the prohibition of discrimination in the enjoyment 
of the Convention’s rights. It then sets out the rights, first, of all migrant work -
ers and members of their families, irrespective of their migration status, and, 
second, the additional rights of documented  migrant workers and their fami -
lies. In defining the civil and political rights of migrant workers, the Conven -
tion follows the language of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights very closely. Some articles restate the rights of the Covenant taking 
into account the particular situation of migrant workers, such as consular 
15notification rights upon arrest and specific provisions concerning breaches 
of migration law, the destruction of identity documents and the prohibition 
of collective expulsion. In addition, the Convention mentions the right to 
property, originally protected in the Declaration although not contained in 
the Covenant.
The Convention defines the economic, social and cultural rights of migrant 
workers in the light of their particular situation. For example, at a minimum, 
urgent medical care must be provided, as it would be provided to a na -
tional, and the children of migrant workers have the basic right of access to 
education, irrespective of their legal status. Additional rights exist for workers 
who are properly documented and to particular classes of migrant workers, 
such as frontier, seasonal, itinerant and project-tied workers.
The Convention, in part VII, requires all State parties to report periodically 
to the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers 
and Members of their Families, established to review its application. Ar -
ticles 76 and 77 also provide for a right of complaint by a State par -
ty against another State party or by individuals, provided the State party  
concerned accepts the Committee’s competence in this regard.
H. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(2006)
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities entered into force 
in 2008. Its purpose is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal 
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with 
disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.
The Convention does not define persons with disabilities. It instead identifies 
that “persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, 
mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various 
barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal 
basis with others”. It therefore views disability as the result of an interaction 
between an individual’s condition and an inaccessible society. The barriers 
confronting persons with disabilities are many—for example, they might be 
environmental such as a staircase, or attitudinal such as a belief that persons 
with disabilities cannot learn. Such barriers can obstruct the enjoyment of 
rights. The Convention therefore identifies these barriers as discriminatory and 
requires their removal. In adopting a rights-based approach to disability, the 
Convention moves away from viewing disability as a sickness inherent in the 
individual requiring either a medical intervention (medical approach) to fix 
the person, or a charitable intervention (charity approach) based on voluntary 
assistance rather than individual right.
16The Convention sets out general principles, including respect for inherent 
dignity and freedom of choice and independence; non-discrimination; par -
ticipation and inclusion; respect for difference and diversity; equality of op -
portunity; accessibility; equality between men and women; and respect for 
the evolving capacities of children.
It recognizes that all persons with disabilities enjoy civil, cultural, economic, 
political and social rights on an equal basis with others. In this sense, it does 
not recognize new rights for persons with disabilities but states that per -
sons with disabilities should enjoy rights without discrimination. In addition, 
the Convention sets out a series of obligations on States to enable persons 
with disabilities to enjoy their rights, in diverse areas such as access to jus -
tice, awareness-raising, accessibility, data and statistics and international 
cooperation. It also has specific provisions on women with disabilities and 
children with disabilities.
The Convention establishes the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Dis -
abilities, to which State parties report periodically on the measures they have 
taken to give effect to the Convention.
The Optional Protocol  to the Convention entered into force in 2008. It gives 
the Committee the authority to receive communications from individuals al -
leging violations of any of the provisions of the Convention. It also allows 
the Committee to undertake inquiries when it receives reliable information 
indicating grave or systematic violations of the Convention.
I. International Convention for the Protection of  
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (2006)
The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from  
Enforced Disappearance was adopted by the General Assembly in De -
cember 2006 and entered into 
force four years later. The Conven -
tion is unique in that it combines 
traditional human rights provisions 
with international humanitarian 
and criminal law provisions.
In article 1, the Convention  
defines the non-derogable right 
not to be subjected to an enforced 
disappearance and affirms the 
prohibition of enforced disappear -
ance as a non-revocable provi -
sion:What is enforced  
disappearance?
“The arrest, detention, abduction or 
any other form of deprivation of liberty 
by agents of the State or by persons 
or groups of persons acting with the 
authorization, support or acquiescence 
of the State, followed by a refusal to 
acknowledge the deprivation of liberty 
or by concealment of the fate or where -
abouts of the disappeared person, 
which place such a person outside the 
protection of the law” (art. 2).
17No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat 
of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may be 
invoked as a justification for enforced disappearance.
The Convention also affirms that enforced disappearance constitutes a 
crime against humanity when practised in a widespread or systematic 
manner (art. 5).
Among the measures intended to prevent enforced disappearances, the 
Convention mentions the express prohibition of secret detention and the 
maintenance of official registers of persons deprived of their liberty. It also 
establishes that, when an alleged perpetrator of an enforced disappear -
ance is present in any territory under the jurisdiction of a State party, that 
State shall take the necessary measures to establish its jurisdiction over 
the offence.
Article 24 includes, in the definition of a victim of enforced disappear -
ance, “the disappeared person and any individual who has suffered harm 
as the direct result of an enforced disappearance”, such as family mem -
bers. The same article also establishes the right to the truth “regarding the 
circumstances of the enforced disappearance, the progress and results of 
the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person”. Although this 
right had been recognized in humanitarian law and by some international 
bodies, the Convention is the first international human rights instrument to 
expressly state it.
The Convention requires State parties to criminalize acts of enforced dis -
appearance, to conduct investigations and to take effective legislative 
and other measures to prevent such acts from happening (arts. 6–17, 25).
The Convention also accords special protection to children who are direct 
victims of enforced disappearance, whose parents or legal guardians are 
subjected to enforced disappearance, or who are born during the captiv -
ity of a mother subjected to enforced disappearance (art. 25).
The Convention establishes under article 26 the Committee on Enforced 
Disappearances, to which State parties must periodically report on the 
measures they have taken to give effect to the Convention.
Individuals may submit complaints to the Committee, provided that the 
relevant State has accepted the competence of the Committee under  
article 31. Article 32 gives competence to the Committee to entertain 
inter-State complaints.
18As explained in more detail in chapter II, the Committee may also take  
urgent action if it receives urgent requests that a disappeared person should 
be sought and found. It may conduct inquiry procedures into a State party 
if it receives reliable information about serious violations of the Convention 
and may bring these to the urgent attention of the General Assembly if they 
are widespread or systematic.
Finally, article 27 foresees that the State parties will assess the functioning of 
the Committee and may decide to transfer its functions to another monitoring 
body.
J. Reading the treaties as a whole
To understand a State’s obligations under these treaties fully, it is necessary 
to read all the human rights treaties to which a State has become a party 
together . Although separate and free-standing, the treaties also complement 
each other, with a number of principles binding them together. Each lays 
down, explicitly or implicitly, the basic principles of non-discrimination and 
equality, effective protection against violations, special protection for the 
particularly vulnerable, and an understanding of the human being as an ac -
tive and informed participant in the public life of the State where he or she is 
located and in decisions affecting him or her, rather than a passive object of 
the authorities’ decisions. All the treaties based on these common principles 
are interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing, so that no right can 
be fully enjoyed in isolation, but depends on the enjoyment of all the other 
rights. This interdependence is one reason why the human rights treaty bod -
ies are crafting a more coordinated approach to their activities, in particular 
by encouraging State parties to see implementation of the provisions of all 
these treaties as a single objective.
These treaties do not purport to be a definitive catalogue of a State’s human 
rights obligations. Many States, beyond their participation in the United Na -
tions human rights treaty system, are also a party to regional human rights in -
struments, which may further expand the protection offered to persons within 
their jurisdiction. In addition, other treaties, including the Convention relating 
to the Status of Refugees and the conventions of the International Labour 
Organization (ILO), such as ILO Conventions No. 138 concerning Minimum 
Age for Admission to Employment and No. 182 concerning the Prohibition 
and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, 
or ILO Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in 
Independent Countries, are instruments with obvious and important human 
rights dimensions. All these international legal obligations should be con -
sidered together when evaluating a State’s responsibility to protect human 
rights.
19II. IMPLEMENTATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS  
STANDARDS: THE TREATY BODIES
The treaty bodies are the committees of independent experts that review the 
reports by the State parties on their application of the provisions of the core 
human rights treaties. Chapter II sets out to explain their work and why it is 
relevant to the lives of people around the world.
A. What are the human rights treaty bodies?
The international human rights treaties described in chapter I create legal 
obligations on State parties to promote and protect human rights at the 
national level. When a country accepts a treaty through ratification, ac -
cession or succession, it assumes a legal obligation to implement the rights 
set out in it. But this is only the first step, because recognizing rights on 
paper does not guarantee that they will be enjoyed in practice. When 
the first treaty was adopted, it was recognized that State parties would 
require encouragement and assistance in meeting their international obli -
gations to put in place the necessary measures to ensure the enjoyment of 
the rights provided in the treaty by everyone under their jurisdiction. Each 
treaty therefore creates an international committee of independent experts 
to monitor, by various means, the implementation of its provisions.
The application of the human rights treaties listed in chapter I is monitored by 
the following committees:
1. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination , the first 
treaty body to be established, has reviewed the application of the 
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis -
crimination since 1969. It has 18 members.
2. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  was created 
in 1985 to carry out the functions of the Economic and Social Council 
under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights. It has 18 members.
3. The Human Rights Committee  was created in 1976 to review the 
application of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
It has 18 members.
4. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women  
has reviewed the application of the Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women by its State parties since 
1981. It has 23 members.
205. The Committee against Torture , created in 1987, reviews the ap -
plication of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhu -
man or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It has 10 members.
6. The Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture  held its first session in 
February 2007. Its mandate is twofold: to visit all places of de -
tention in State parties; and to provide assistance and advice to 
both States parties and their independent national bodies for the 
prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treat -
ment or punishment, the national preventive mechanisms. It has  
25 members.
7. The Committee on the Rights of the Child  has, since 1991, re -
viewed the application of the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, as well as its Optional Protocols relating to the involvement 
of children in armed conflict and to the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography, by their State parties. It has  
18 members.
8. The Committee on Migrant Workers  held its first session in March 
2004 and reviews the application of the International Convention on 
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of 
their Families. It has 14 members.
9. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , established 
in November 2008, held its first session in February 2009. It has 18 
members.
10. The Committee on Enforced Disappearances  was created in June 
2011 following the entry into force on 23 December 2010 of the 
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced 
Disappearance. It has 10 members.
Each committee is composed of independent experts of recognized compe -
tence in human rights, who are nominated and elected for fixed, renewable 
terms of four years by State parties. Elections for half the members take 
place every two years. The terms of the members of the newest treaty bodies 
(Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, Committee on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities and Committee on Enforced Disappearances) are renew -
able only once.
The treaty bodies generally meet at the United Nations Office at Geneva, 
although the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Elimina -
tion of Discrimination against Women usually hold one of their sessions in  
New York every year. All the treaty bodies receive support from the Human 
Rights Treaties Division of OHCHR in Geneva.
21B. What do the human rights treaty bodies do?
The treaty bodies perform a number of functions aimed at monitoring how the 
treaties are being implemented by their State parties. All treaty bodies, with 
the exception of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, are mandated to 
receive and consider reports submitted periodically by State parties detail -
ing how they are applying the treaty provisions nationally. The treaty bodies 
issue guidelines to assist States with the preparation of their reports, draft 
general comments interpreting the treaty provisions and organize discussions 
on themes related to the treaties. Some, but not all, treaty bodies also perform 
a number of additional functions aimed at strengthening the implementation 
of the treaties by their State parties. Most treaty bodies may consider com -
plaints or communications from individuals alleging that their rights have been 
violated by a State party, provided that State has opted into this procedure. 
Some may also conduct inquiries and consider inter-State complaints.
The following surveys the activities undertaken by the treaty bodies in ac -
cordance with their mandates. Although the ten treaty bodies listed above 
are presented together as part of a coordinated treaty monitoring system, 
it should be noted that each treaty body is an independent committee of 
experts, which has a mandate related to a specific treaty. The treaty bodies 
nevertheless continue their efforts to coordinate their activities, even if their 
procedures and practices may differ as a result of variations in their indi -
vidual mandates under the relevant treaty or optional protocol.6
C. Consideration of State parties’ reports
The primary mandate of all the committees, except the Subcommittee on 
Prevention of Torture, is to review the reports submitted periodically by State 
parties in accordance with the treaties’ provisions. Within this basic man -
date, the treaty bodies have developed practices and procedures that have 
proved remarkably effective in scrutinizing the extent to which States have 
met their obligations under the human rights treaties to which they are a party 
and encouraging further implementation. The following presents the essential 
common features of the consideration of State reports by the treaty bodies:
The State’s obligation to report
In addition to their obligation to implement the substantive provisions of the 
treaty, each State party is also under an obligation to submit regular reports 
to the relevant treaty body on how the rights are being implemented.
6 More precise information relating to a specific treaty body’s procedures can be found in the 
relevant fact sheet for that committee. Most committees’ working methods are also posted on 
the OHCHR website (www.ohchr.org).
22The idea of monitoring human rights by reviewing such State reports origi -
nated in a 1956 resolution of the Economic and Social Council, which  
requested United Nations Member States to submit periodic reports on 
progress made in the advancement of human rights.7 The model was in -
corporated into the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination  
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the two International Covenants of 
1966, and every core international human rights treaty since. In order to 
meet its reporting obligation, each State party must submit a comprehensive 
initial report within one or two years of the treaty entering into force for it (see 
table). It must then continue to report periodically, usually every four or five 
years, in accordance with the provisions of the treaty on further measures 
taken to implement it (with the exception of the International Convention for 
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance). The reports must 
set out the legal, administrative and judicial measures taken by the State to 
give effect to the treaty, and should also mention any factors or difficulties 
encountered in implementing the rights. In order to ensure that reports con -
tain adequate information to allow the committees to do their work, each 
committee issues guidelines on the form and content of State reports. These 
guidelines are issued in a compilation document (HRI/GEN/2), which is 
updated regularly.
7 Resolution 624 B (XXII).
23Reporting periodicities
Treaty Initial report within Periodic reports every
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
 Racial Discrimination1 year 2 years
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rightsa2 years 5 years
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1 year 4 yearsb
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women1 year 4 years
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or  
Degrading Treatment or Punishment1 year 4 years
Convention on the Rights of the Child 2 years 5 years
•		Optional	Protocol	on	the	sale	of	children,	child	prostitution	
and child pornography2 years 5 years or with next report  
under the Convention
•		Optional	Protocol	on	the	involvement	of	children	in	armed	
conflict2 years 5 years or with next report  
under the Convention
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families1 year 5 years
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2 years 4 years
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance2 years Additional information as requested by 
the Committee (art. 29 (4))
a Article 17 of the Covenant does not establish a reporting periodicity, but gives the Economic and Social Council discretion to establish its own reporting programme.
b Article 40 of the Covenant gives the Human Rights Committee discretion to decide when periodic reports shall be submitted. In general, these are required every four years.
24The purpose of reporting
State parties are encouraged to see the process of preparing their reports for 
the treaty bodies not only as the fulfilment of an international obligation, but 
also as an opportunity to take stock of the state of human rights protection 
within their jurisdiction for the purpose of policy planning and implementa -
tion. The preparation offers an occasion for each State party to:
(a) Conduct a comprehensive review of the measures it has taken to 
harmonize domestic law and policy with the provisions of the interna -
tional human rights treaties to which it is a party;
(b) Monitor progress made in promoting the enjoyment of the rights set 
forth in the treaties in the context of the promotion of human rights in 
general;
(c) Identify problems and shortcomings in its approach to the implementa -
tion of the treaties;
(d) Assess future needs and goals for more effective implementation of 
the treaties; and
(e) Plan and develop appropriate policies to achieve these goals.8
Seen in this way, the reporting system is an important tool for a State to 
assess what it has achieved and what more it needs to do to promote and 
protect human rights in the country. The reporting process should encourage 
and facilitate, at the national level, public participation, public scrutiny of 
State policies, laws and programmes, and constructive engagement with 
civil society in a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect, with the aim of 
advancing the enjoyment by all of the rights protected by the relevant treaty. 
Some States incorporate comments and criticism from NGOs in their reports; 
others submit their reports to parliamentary scrutiny before submitting them to 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for consideration by the relevant 
treaty body.
8 HRI/MC/2004/3, para. 9. A full explanation of the objectives of reporting can be found 
in general comment No. 1 (1989) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.Implementation 
and follow-upPreparation of 
the repor t
Preparation for 
review
Consideration  
of the repor tConcluding 
obser vations
25How does each treaty body examine a State party’s report?
Although there are variations in the procedures adopted by each committee 
in considering a State party’s report, the following basic stages are common 
to all treaty bodies.
1. Submission of the initial report
The report must be submitted to the 
Secretary-General (represented by 
OHCHR) in one of the six official 
languages of the United Nations. 
It is then processed by the Secre -
tariat, and translated into the com -
mittee’s working languages. Once 
processed, the report is scheduled 
for consideration by the committee 
at one of its regular sessions. It may 
take time before a report can be 
considered, as some treaty bod -
ies face a two-year backlog. Most 
committees try to give priority to ini -
tial reports or to reports from States 
that have not reported for a long 
time.What is a common core  
document?
State reports consist of the common 
core document and a treaty-specific 
document.
The  common  core  document  con -
tains general and factual information 
relating to the implementation of the 
treaties which may be of relevance to 
all or several treaty bodies (see HRI/
MC/2006/3). A treaty body may re -
quest that the common core document 
be updated if it considers that the infor -
mation it contains is out of date.
The treaty-specific document contains 
information relating to the implemen -
tation of the treaty which the relevant 
committee monitors.Consideration  
of the reportImplementation 
and follow-upPreparation of 
the repor t
Preparation for 
review
Consideration  
of the repor tConcluding 
obser vations
262. List of issues/list of themes
Before the session at which it will formally consider a report, a committee 
draws up a list of issues , which is submitted to the State party. This list 
provides an opportunity for the committee to request from the State party 
any additional information, which may have been omitted from the report 
or which members consider necessary for the committee to assess the state 
of implementation of the treaty in the country concerned. The list of issues 
also enables the committee to begin the process of questioning the State 
party in more detail on specific issues raised by the report which are of 
particular concern to members. Many State parties find the list of issues 
a useful guide to the line of questioning they are likely to face when their 
report is formally considered. This enables their delegations to prepare 
themselves and makes their dialogue with the committee more constructive, 
informed and concrete.
Lists of issues are drafted before the session at which a report will be con -
sidered. Depending on the treaty body, they are drafted either in a pre-
sessional working group convened immediately before or after a regular 
session or during the plenary session. Most committees appoint one or more 
of their members to act as country rapporteurs to take the lead in drafting the 
list of issues for a specific country.
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination has adopted the 
so-called list of themes , to which no responses are required. The country rap -
porteur will send a State party a short list of themes with a view to guiding 
and focusing the dialogue between its delegation and the Committee during 
the consideration of the State party’s report.
3. Written response to list of issues
The written responses to the list of issues supplement the report, and are 
especially important if it has taken a committee a long time to take up the 
report.
4. List of issues prior to reporting
In 2007, the Committee against Torture adopted a new optional report -
ing procedure (the so-called list of issues prior to reporting ) which con -
sists in the adoption of lists of issues to help State parties to prepare their  
periodic reports.
The State party’s response to this list of issues constitutes its periodic  
report under article 19 of the Convention against Torture.
27The procedure does not apply to initial reports. The Committee is of the 
view that this procedure will assist State parties to prepare and submit more 
focused reports, guiding their content, facilitating the reporting process and 
strengthening State parties’ capacity to fulfil their reporting obligations in a 
timely and effective manner.
During 2009, the Human Rights Committee also decided to use lists  
of issues prior to reporting as an optional reporting procedure for State 
parties.
5. Other sources of information
In addition to the State parties’ reports, the treaty bodies may receive informa -
tion on a country’s human rights situation from other sources, including United 
Nations agencies, other intergovernmental organizations, national human 
rights institutions (NHRIs), non-governmental organizations (NGOs), both 
international and national, and professional groups and academic institu -
tions. Most committees allocate specific plenary time to hearing submissions 
from United Nations agencies and most also receive NGOs. Depending on 
when the information is submitted, issues raised by these organizations may 
be incorporated in the list of issues or inform the questions that members ask 
the State delegation. In the light of all the information available, the commit -
tee examines the report.
A number of treaties provide for a special role for specific United Nations 
bodies in the consideration of reports. Article 45 of the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child specifically mentions the role of the United Na -
tions Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
along with other United Nations 
agencies and bodies. Article 74 
of the International Convention on 
the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members 
of their Families similarly provides 
for the participation of the Inter -
national Labour Office/Organi -
zation. Article 38 of the Conven -
tion on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities and article 28 of the 
International Convention for the 
Protection of All Persons from En -
forced Disappearance also pro -
vide for active cooperation with 
relevant United Nations bodies.Official languages and  
working languages
While the official United Nations 
languages are Arabic, Chinese, En - 
glish, French, Russian and Spanish, the 
committees generally choose to work 
in only some of these languages, de -
pending on their membership and in 
order to cut costs in relation to docu -
mentation. Core documents, such as 
concluding observations, rules of pro -
cedure and reporting guidelines, are 
always translated into all six.
The working languages of the Sec -
retariat at Geneva are English and 
French.
286. Formal consideration of the report: constructive dialogue between the 
treaty body and the State party
All treaty bodies have developed the practice, pioneered by the Com -
mittee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, of inviting State parties 
to send a delegation to attend the session at which the committee will 
consider their report in order to allow them to respond to members’ ques -
tions and provide additional information on their efforts to implement the 
provisions of the relevant treaty. This procedure is not adversarial and the 
committee does not pass judgement on the State party. Rather, the aim is to 
engage in a constructive dialogue in order to assist the State in its efforts 
to implement the treaty as fully and effectively as possible. The notion of 
constructive dialogue reflects the fact that the treaty bodies are not judicial 
bodies, but were created to monitor the implementation of the treaties and 
provide encouragement and advice to States. If a State party does not 
send a delegation, a committee may nevertheless proceed with the consid -
eration of that State party’s report.
7. Concluding observations and recommendations
The examination of a report culminates in the adoption of “concluding ob -
servations” intended to give the reporting State practical advice and encour -
agement on further steps to implement the rights contained in the treaty. In its 
concluding observations, a treaty bodies will acknowledge the positive steps 
taken by the State, but also identify areas of concern, where more needs to 
be done to give full effect to the treaty’s provisions. The treaty bodies seek to 
make their recommendations as concrete and practicable as possible. States 
are required to publicize the concluding observations within the country so 
as to inform public debate on how to move forward.
8. Implementation of concluding observations and submission of the next 
periodic report
A committee’s adoption of its concluding observations brings the formal con -
sideration of a report to a close; but the process does not end there. The 
implementation of the rights contained in the treaties requires continuous 
effort on the part of States. After the submission of their initial reports, States 
are required to submit further reports to the treaty bodies at regular intervals. 
These are referred to as “periodic reports”. Periodic reports are normally 
not as long as the more comprehensive initial report, but must contain all 
information necessary for a committee to continue its work of monitoring the 
ongoing implementation of a treaty in the country concerned. An important 
element of any periodic report will be reporting back to the committee on 
concrete measures taken by a State party to implement the treaty body’s 
29recommendations in the conclud -
ing observations on the previous 
report, so as to close the reporting 
cycle.
The importance of follow-up to trea -
ty body recommendations
Treaty bodies have no means of 
enforcing their recommendations. 
Nevertheless, most States take the 
reporting process seriously, and the 
committees have proved successful 
in raising concerns relating to the 
implementation of the treaties in 
many States.
In order to assist States in imple -
menting their recommendations, 
the treaty bodies have begun to 
introduce procedures to ensure ef -
fective follow-up to their concluding 
observations. Some (Committee on 
the Elimination of Racial Discrimi -
nation, Human Rights Committee, 
Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women and 
Committee against Torture) request, 
in their concluding observations, 
that States report back to the country rapporteur or follow-up rapporteur with -
in one year (sometimes two (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women)) on the measures taken in response to specific recommen -
dations or “priority concerns” that are rapidly implementable. The rapporteur 
then reports back to the committee.
Some members of treaty bodies have undertaken visits to State parties, at 
their invitation, in order to follow up on the report and the implementation of 
concluding observations.
What happens if a State party does not report?
Reporting to the treaty bodies can be a considerable challenge. A State 
that has ratified all nine core international human rights treaties is expected 
to produce more than 20 human rights reports over a ten-year period: 
that is one every six months. States must also produce responses to lists of The “review procedure” –  
review of implementation 
without a report
According to this procedure, a commit -
tee may proceed with the examination  
of the state of implementation of the 
relevant treaty by the State party even 
though it has not received any State 
report. The committee may formulate 
a list of issues and questions for the 
State party, which is invited to send a 
delegation to attend the session. Infor -
mation may be received from United 
Nations partners and NGOs and, on 
the basis of this information and the 
dialogue with the State party, the com -
mittee will issue its concluding observa -
tions including recommendations. The 
review may proceed even if the State 
party declines to send a delegation 
to the session. The review procedure 
is used only in exceptional cases; in 
very many cases, notification by the 
committee that it intends to consider the 
situation in a country in the absence 
of a report is sufficient to persuade the 
State party to produce a report within 
a short period of time.
30issues and prepare to attend treaty body sessions, and will then perhaps 
need to submit further reports on follow-up to concluding observations. In 
addition, States might also have obligations at regional level. This adds 
up to a considerable reporting burden, so it is perhaps not surprising that 
States can fall behind in their reporting schedules or, in some cases, fail 
to report at all.
The treaty bodies recognize these difficulties and have been considering 
ways of facilitating the task of State parties (see chap. III below). Neverthe -
less, the obligation to report, like the other obligations arising from the rati -
fication of these treaties, is an international legal obligation, freely entered 
into by the State. The treaty bodies seek to encourage States to report in a 
timely manner. States may seek technical assistance from OHCHR if they 
face particular difficulties. But, if a State has failed to report over a long 
period and has not responded to a committee’s requests to report, the com -
mittee considers the situation in the country without a report—sometimes 
referred to as the “review procedure” (see box).
D. Consideration of complaints from individuals
Except for the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, the treaty bodies listed 
in section A above may, under certain circumstances, consider complaints or 
communications from individuals who believe their rights have been violated 
by a State party:
•	 The	Committee	 on	the	Elimination	 of	Racial	Discrimination	 may	con-
sider individual communications brought against State parties that 
have made the requisite declaration under article 14 of the Conven -
tion;
•	 The	Human	Rights	Committee	 may	consider	 individual	 communica -
tions brought against State parties to the first Optional Protocol to the 
Covenant;
•	 The	Committee	 on	the	Elimination	 of	Discrimination	 against	Women	
may consider individual communications brought against State par -
ties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention;
•	 The	Committee	 against	Torture	may	consider	 individual	 communica -
tions brought against State parties that have made the requisite dec -
laration under article 22 of the Convention;
•	 The	Committee	 on	the	Rights	of	Persons	with	Disabilities	 may	consider	
individual communications brought against State parties to the Op -
tional Protocol to the Convention;
31•	 The	Committee	 on	Enforced	 Disappearances	 may	consider	 individu -
al communications brought against State parties that have made the 
requisite declaration under article 31 of the Convention;
•	 The	International	 Convention	 on	the	Protection	 of	the	Rights	of	All	
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families,9 the Optional 
Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights10 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure11 also con -
tain provisions for individual communications to be considered by 
their respective committees, but these are not yet operative.
The procedure is optional for State parties: a treaty body cannot consider 
complaints relating to a State party unless that State has expressly recognized 
the treaty body’s competence in this regard, either by a declaration under 
the treaty’s relevant article or by accepting the relevant optional protocol. Al -
though in some respects the procedure is “quasi-judicial”, the decisions can -
not be enforced directly by the committees. In many cases, however, State 
parties have implemented the committees’ recommendations and granted a 
remedy to the complainants.
Who can complain?
Any individual who claims that her or his rights under a treaty have been 
violated by a State party to that treaty may bring a communication before 
the relevant committee, provided that the State has recognized the compe -
tence of the committee to receive such complaints. Complaints may also be 
brought by third parties if the individuals themselves have given their written 
consent or are incapable of giving such consent.
How do I lodge a complaint?
Detailed information about the treaty bodies’ individual complaints proce -
dures, including advice and instructions on how to complain, can be found 
in Fact Sheet No. 7 and on the OHCHR website.
9 To come into effect, the procedure under article 77 on individual communications requires a 
minimum of 10 State parties to make the requisite declaration.
10 The Optional Protocol was adopted by the General Assembly in December 2008 and 
opened for signature in 2009. It requires ten State parties to enter into force.
11 The Optional Protocol on a communications procedure was adopted by the General  
Assembly in December 2011. It will be open for signature in 2012. It, too, requires ten State 
parties to enter into force.
32E. Inquiries
Five treaty bodies—the Committee against Torture, the Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Committee on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, the Committee on Enforced Disappearances, and 
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Committee 
on the Rights of the Child (when the relevant optional protocols enter into 
force)—may initiate inquiries if they receive reliable information containing 
well-founded indications of serious, grave or systematic violations of the con -
ventions in a State party.
Which States may be subject to inquiries?
With the exception of inquiries by the Committee on Enforced Disappear-
ances, for which State parties automatically accept the Committee’s compe -
tence when they ratify the Convention, inquiries may be undertaken by the 
other committees only with respect to State parties that have separately and 
additionally recognized their competence in this regard. At the time of signa -
ture, ratification or accession, State parties to the Convention against Torture 
may opt out by making a declaration under article 28. State parties to the 
 Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimi -
nation against Women may similarly exclude the competence of the Commit -
tee by making a declaration under article 10. State parties to the Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities may also 
opt out by making a declaration under article 8 at the time of signature, rati -
fication or accession. Any State which opts out of the procedure in this way 
may decide to accept it at a later stage.
Inquiry procedure
The Convention against Torture (art. 20), the Optional Protocol to the Con -
vention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(arts. 8–9), the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance (art. 33), the Optional Protocols to the Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (arts. 6–7), to the International Cov -
enant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (art. 11) and to the Conven -
tion on the Rights of the Child (art. 13) set out the following basic procedure 
for their committees to undertake urgent inquiries:
1. The procedure may be initiated if a committee receives reliable informa -
tion indicating that the rights contained in the treaty are being system -
atically violated by a State party. For inquiries under the Convention 
against Torture, the information should contain well-founded indications 
that torture is being systematically practised in the territory of the State 
33party; for inquiries under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women, the information should indicate grave 
or systematic violations of the rights set forth in the Convention by a State 
party;
2. A committee first invites the State party to cooperate in the examination 
of the information by submitting observations;
3. A committee may, on the basis of the State party’s observations and other 
relevant information available to it, decide to designate one or more of 
its members to make a confidential inquiry and report to the committee 
urgently. The procedures under the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the International Convention 
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities specifically autho -
rize a visit to the territory of the State concerned, if warranted and with 
the State’s consent; visits are also envisaged by the procedure under the 
Convention against Torture;
4. The findings of the member(s) are then examined by the committee and 
transmitted to the State party together with any appropriate comments or 
suggestions/recommendations;
5. The procedures under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities set a six-month deadline for the State party to 
respond with its own observations on the Committee’s findings, comments 
and recommendations and to inform the Committee of the measures tak -
en in response to the inquiry if the Committee invites it to do so;
6. A committee may decide, in consultation with the State party, to include a 
summary account of the results of the proceedings in its annual report. If 
the State party agrees, the full inquiry and the State party’s response may 
be made public;
7. The cooperation of the State party must be sought throughout the pro -
ceedings.
F. Urgent action and urgent appeals to the General  
Assembly under the International Convention for the 
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
As briefly mentioned in chapter I, the International Convention for the Pro -
tection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance enables its Committee 
to take urgent action. Under article 30, the Committee may receive urgent 
34requests from relatives of a disappeared person or their legal representatives, 
their counsel or any person authorized by them, as well as by any other per -
son having a legitimate interest, that a disappeared person should be sought 
and found. The Committee will transmit the communication to the State party 
concerned, requesting it to provide observations and comments within a time 
limit set by the Committee.
Moreover, if the violations amount to widespread or systematic acts (i.e., 
crimes against humanity), the Committee may, after seeking from the State 
party concerned all relevant information on the situation, bring the matter 
to the urgent attention of the United Nations General Assembly through the 
Secretary-General under article 34.
G. Early warning and urgent action by the Committee on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
Although not provided for in the Convention, in 1993 the Committee on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination established an early warn -
ing and urgent action procedure for the prevention of serious violations of 
its Convention. Under this procedure, the Committee may seek information 
from State parties and may adopt a decision expressing specific concerns, 
addressed not only to the States in question, but also to the Human Rights 
Council and its special procedures, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide, as well as the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights and the Secretary-General, with a recommendation that 
the matter should be brought to the attention of the Security Council. The 
Committee can take action under the procedure on its own initiative or on 
the basis of information submitted by third parties.
H. Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and 
the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture
The Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture provides a practi -
cal means to assist State parties in meeting their obligations to prevent and 
combat torture and other forms of ill-treatment by establishing a global system 
of regular visits to all places where persons are, or may be, deprived of their 
liberty. Its innovative two-pronged approach relies on an international body, 
the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, as well as on national preventive 
mechanisms which must be established or designated by each State party. 
In order for the Subcommittee to fulfil its mandate, it is granted considerable 
powers under article 14 of the Optional Protocol. Each State party is re -
quired to allow visits by the Subcommittee to any place under its jurisdiction 
and control where persons are or may be deprived of their liberty, either by 
virtue of an order given by a public authority or at its instigation or with its 
35consent and acquiescence. The Subcommittee has unrestricted access to 
all places of detention, their installations and facilities, and to all relevant 
information relating to the treatment and conditions of detention of persons 
deprived of their liberty. The Subcommittee conducts private interviews with -
out witnesses. Similar powers are to be granted to the national preventive 
mechanisms. After a visit, the Subcommittee issues a confidential report with 
a series of recommendations to the relevant State authorities, with a view to 
improving the treatment of detainees, including their conditions of detention. 
The report on a visit is part of the dialogue between the Subcommittee and 
the authorities of the State party concerned, aimed at preventing torture. 
The Subcommittee will publish the report whenever it is requested to do 
so by the State party concerned. Furthermore, the Subcommittee’s mandate 
includes advising and assisting States in the establishment of national preven -
tive mechanisms. The Subcommittee also provides these mechanisms with 
advice on and assistance in reinforcing their independence and capacities 
and strengthening domestic safeguards against ill-treatment of persons de -
prived of their liberty.
For more information on the Optional Protocol to the Convention against 
Torture and the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, see the OHCHR 
website.
I. Inter-State communications
Although this procedure has never been used, five human rights treaties12 al-
low their State parties to complain to the relevant treaty body about alleged 
violations of the treaty by another State party. The Convention against Torture 
(art. 21), the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance (art. 32) and the International Convention on the 
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families 
(art. 76) set out such a procedure. However, domestic remedies need to 
be exhausted first and the procedure applies only to State parties that have 
made a declaration accepting the competence of the relevant committee in 
this regard. The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination (arts. 11–13) and the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (arts. 41–43) set out a more elaborate procedure for the 
resolution of such disputes between State parties through the establishment 
of an ad hoc conciliation commission. This procedure also requires domes -
tic remedies to be exhausted first. It normally applies to all State parties to 
12 Once the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communica -
tions procedure enter into force, their respective committees will also be able to entertain State-
to-State complaints regarding State parties that have formally accepted this competence under 
article 10 and article 12, respectively.
36the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis -
crimination, but, under the Covenant, it applies only to those State parties 
that have formally accepted it.
Resolution of inter-State disputes concerning interpretation or  
application of a convention
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women (art. 29), the International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (art. 42), the Convention against 
Torture (art. 30), the International Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Racial Discrimination (art. 22) and the International Convention 
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of 
their Families (art. 92) provide for disputes between State parties concern -
ing the interpretation or application of these conventions to be resolved in 
the first instance by negotiation or, failing that, by arbitration. One of the 
States involved may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice if 
the parties fail to agree on the terms of arbitration within six months. State 
parties may opt out of this procedure by making a declaration at the time 
of ratification or accession, in which case, in accordance with the princi -
ple of reciprocity, they are barred from bringing cases against other State 
parties. This procedure has so far been used twice: in a case opposing the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda13 and in another oppos -
ing Georgia and the Russian Federation14 before the International Court 
of Justice.
J. General comments
Each of the treaty bodies publishes its interpretation of the provisions of its 
respective human rights treaty in the form of “general comments” or “general 
recommendations”. These cover a wide range of subjects, from the compre -
hensive interpretation of substantive provisions, such as the right to life or the 
right to adequate food, to general guidance on the information that should 
be submitted in State reports relating to specific articles of the treaties. Gen -
eral comments have also dealt with wider, cross-cutting issues, such as the 
role of national human rights institutions, the rights of persons with disabilities, 
violence against women and the rights of minorities.
All are available from the OHCHR website (www.ohchr.org).
13 See Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Re -
public of the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2006, 
p. 39, para. 87.
14 See Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Judgment of 1 April 2011.
37K. Days of general discussion/thematic debates
Some treaty bodies hold days of general discussion on a particular theme of 
concern to them. These discussions are usually open to external participants, 
such as United Nations partners, delegations from State parties, NGOs and 
individual experts. Their outcome may lead the treaty body to draft a new 
general comment.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child provides for its Committee to recom -
mend to the General Assembly that it request the Secretary-General to under -
take on its behalf studies on specific issues (art. 45 (c)). So far the Committee 
has made two such requests: on children and armed conflict and on violence 
against children. The Secretary-General has issued related studies and the 
General Assembly subsequently established two mechanisms: the Special Rep -
resentative of the Secretary-General for children and armed conflict; and the 
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children.
L. Meetings of State parties and meetings with State  
parties
Each treaty (except the International Covenant on Economic, Social and  
Cultural Rights) provides for a formal meeting of State parties to be held 
every two years, usually at United Nations Headquarters, in order to elect 
half the members of the treaty body.
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is the first treaty 
that provides explicitly for such meetings to be held for other purposes, too.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (art. 50), the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (art. 47) and the International Conven -
tion for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (art. 44) 
provide for a conference of State parties to be convened to vote on any 
proposed amendments to their provisions.
Most committees also hold regular informal meetings with the State parties to 
their respective treaties to discuss matters of common concern related to their 
work and the implementation of the treaties.
M. Coordination among the treaty bodies
Annual meeting of chairpersons
The General Assembly recognized the need for coordination among the 
human rights treaty bodies in 1983, when it called on their chairpersons to 
meet in order to discuss how to enhance their work. The first such meeting 
38took place in 1984. Since 1995, the chairpersons of the treaty bodies have 
met annually.
The meeting provides a forum for the chairpersons of the ten human rights 
treaty bodies to discuss their work and consider ways to make the treaty body 
system as a whole more effective. Issues addressed at these meetings have 
included the streamlining and overall improvement of human rights reporting 
procedures, harmonization and efficiency of the committees’ methods of work, 
follow-up to world conferences and financial issues.
Informal consultations with State parties as well as United Nations partners, 
NHRIs and NGOs have also been a feature of these meetings. Since 1999, 
the chairpersons have held meetings with special procedures mandate hold -
ers (with either thematic or country mandates). Their discussions have focused 
on technical questions, such as increasing the exchange of information and 
best practices between treaty bodies and special procedures, cross-referenc -
ing and joint follow-up to their respective recommendations.
In 2010, the meeting was held for the first time outside of Geneva, in Brus -
sels. The idea was to bring the treaty bodies closer to the level where they are 
implemented and to raise awareness at the regional level of their work so as to 
strengthen linkages and synergies between international and regional human 
rights mechanisms and institutions. It was agreed to hold the meeting in a differ -
ent region every other year.
The inter-committee meeting
Between 2002 and 2011, the annual meeting of chairpersons was com -
plemented by an “inter-committee meeting”, which included the chairper -
sons and two additional members from each committee. The first such 
meeting focused on the harmonization of working methods. The State par -
ties welcomed the institution of the inter-committee meeting. The stronger 
representation of the committees allowed for more detailed discussion of 
recommendations on working methods than had been possible at the meet -
ings of chairpersons.
One of the chairs of the treaty bodies usually chairs both the inter-committee 
meeting and the meeting of chairpersons, on a rotating basis.
Following a recommendation of the meeting of chairpersons in 2010, a 
working group of the inter-committee meeting on follow-up was established, 
composed of both the rapporteurs on follow-up to concluding observations 
and the rapporteurs on follow-up to individual communications of each treaty 
body, if applicable, or the members responsible for follow-up activities. The 
meeting of chairpersons further recommended that other thematic working 
39groups should be established and requested the Secretariat to organize their 
meetings within available resources.
In June 2011, the meeting of chairpersons agreed that the inter-committee 
meeting’s format should be changed. For instance, ad hoc thematic working 
groups could be established at the request of the chairpersons. Such working 
groups could discuss issues of common interest, including the harmonization 
of treaty body jurisprudence and working methods.
40III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS  
 HUMAN RIGHTS TREATY SYSTEM
Although the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was drafted over 60 
years ago, and the drafting of the International Bill of Human Rights (the 
Universal Declaration plus the two Covenants) was completed by 1966, 
the international human rights treaty system has continued to grow with the 
adoption of new instruments and the creation of new treaty bodies. The 
broad range of instruments and bodies has ensured greater promotion and 
protection of human rights in a range of specific areas of concern to the 
international community, but has also presented the system with an important 
challenge: how best to ensure that the different elements of the expanding 
system work effectively together?
A. The expansion of the human rights treaty system and 
the need for strengthening it
Since 2004, the human rights treaty body system has almost doubled in size 
with the addition of four new treaty bodies and three new optional protocols 
for individual complaints, of which one is already in force. There have been 
increases in the membership of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights 
of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families since the beginning 
of 2010 and of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
and the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture from January 2011, bring -
ing the total number of treaty body experts to 172 (up from 125 at the end 
of 2009). Meeting time has also been on the rise. Among the most recent 
developments is the entry into force of the International Convention for the 
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance on 23 December 
2010. In addition, and also as a positive side effect of the new universal 
periodic review (UPR), States have increased ratification and reporting under 
international human rights treaties. For instance, in 2010, the nine human 
rights treaty bodies with a reporting procedure covered over 130 country 
reviews and examined over 100 individual complaints.
This growth has prompted the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Human Rights to request all stakeholders to rethink the future of treaty bod -
ies and to come up with innovative and creative ideas to strengthen the 
system.
The treaty bodies have been successful in pursuing their mandates, in particu -
lar by engaging States in open and frank discussion on the problems of real -
izing human rights through the reporting process. Nevertheless, until fairly 
recently, each treaty body tended to approach its work independently of the 
others, even though in many respects their activities overlap. Because the 
41committees were created separately under their respective treaties, they have 
been free to develop their own procedures and practices and, although 
there are broad similarities in the way in which they function, the consider -
able variations have sometimes led to confusion and lack of coherence.
The treaty bodies have sought to become more effective by streamlining and 
harmonizing their working methods and practices for many years, including 
through the inter-committee meetings. At the same time, it is recognized that 
some variations in practice are justified, or even required in strict accordance 
with the relevant treaty.
The role of the human rights treaty system in strengthening national human 
rights protection systems
The human rights treaties are legal instruments that set international standards 
for promoting and protecting human rights worldwide. By ratifying the trea -
ties, States subscribe to these standards and commit themselves to implement -
ing the rights at the national level. The treaty bodies encourage and support 
States in this effort. Such an approach may seem focused on the international 
level; yet, clearly, it is at the national level that the promotion and protection 
of human rights matter most so that they may be enjoyed by all men, women 
and children in each country.
The treaty bodies have an important role in supporting efforts to strengthen 
the protection of human rights at the national level. Firstly, reporting to the 
treaty bodies is itself an important part of the development of a national 
human rights protection system. Secondly, the output of the treaty bodies 
(including the mandate of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture on the 
ground) provides States with practical advice and assistance on how best to 
implement the treaties.
Importance of the reporting process at the national level
Efforts to encourage States to take a holistic approach to reporting by look -
ing at the complete range of obligations to which they have subscribed 
are not aimed solely at making it easier for States. Although the reports are 
required by an international body, the process to produce them is very impor -
tant nationally. In meeting their reporting obligations under the treaties, States 
engage in a process of self-assessment to gauge the extent to which they ef -
fectively protect human rights. Gathering information on national implemen -
tation helps States plan and put in place human rights-based programmes. 
Many States are engaged in parallel processes of treaty reporting, formulat -
ing a national human rights action plan and implementing national develop -
ment plans. Linking these processes can ensure that human rights are at the 
42heart of national strategic planning, thereby guaranteeing more effective 
implementation of human rights standards nationally. The reporting process, 
from the preparation of the report, through the international process of its con -
sideration, to the national response to the treaty body’s recommendations, 
can also stimulate national debate on human rights within civil society and 
create new human rights constituencies.
Practical advice and assistance from the treaty bodies
The output of the treaty bodies can provide States, as well as United Na -
tions country teams and donors, with useful guidance on where more ac -
tion is required to strengthen the protection of human rights. Once a State 
party’s reports have been produced and considered by the treaty bodies, 
practical and targeted concluding observations and recommendations pro -
vide precise advice on specific areas which may require attention. The 
opinions expressed by the committees in response to individual complaints 
are another source of specific guidance, focused on particular problems 
that need action. The general comments of the treaty bodies provide ad -
ditional information of a more elaborate nature on how the treaties should 
be implemented.
Such output can have a significant impact on a State, helping to ensure more 
effective implementation of the treaties through, for example, the proposal 
of new legislation or the provision of better human rights training to State 
officials. The impact depends not only on the Government, but also on par -
liament and the judiciary as well as on others that can influence the way in 
which human rights are protected and promoted within the country, such as 
national and regional parliaments, NHRIs, judges and lawyers, as well as 
civil society.
The impact of the treaty body system on strengthening the protection and 
promotion of human rights at the national level can further be illustrated by 
the preventive and operative mandate of the Subcommittee on Prevention of 
Torture, as well as the objectives of the Optional Protocol to the Convention 
against Torture. The Subcommittee’s preventive field visits directly assist State 
parties, providing them with observations on the situation on the ground 
and recommendations for the protection of persons deprived of their liberty 
and the prevention of torture. Furthermore, the Subcommittee contributes to 
national institution-building, i.e., by advising and assisting State parties in the 
establishment of independent national preventive mechanisms. Such national 
mechanisms are themselves mandated to regularly examine the treatment of 
persons deprived of their liberty in the country, and to make recommenda -
tions to the State authorities to improve the conditions of detention.
43B. The role and interaction of civil society and national  
human rights institutions with the treaty body system
Civil society is made up of organizations and individuals that voluntar -
ily engage in public participation and action around shared interests, 
purposes or values that are compatible with the goals of the United 
Nations. A number of such civil society organizations concerned with 
the promotion and protection of universal human rights play an impor -
tant role in providing the treaty bodies with reliable independent infor -
mation about situations and developments in State parties, as well as 
in monitoring the implementation of treaty bodies’ recommendations. 
Civil society actors involved and interacting with treaty bodies may 
be: human rights defenders; human rights organizations (NGOs, as -
sociations, victim groups); coalitions and networks (women’s rights, 
children’s rights, environmental rights); community-based groups  
(indigenous peoples, minorities); unions (trade unions as well as profes -
sional associations such as journalist associations, bar associations, mag -
istrate associations, student unions); social movements (peace movements, 
student movements, pro-democracy movements); relatives of victims; and 
academic institutions.
National human rights institutions are institutions created by States to promote 
and protect human rights, and are an important part of any national human 
rights protection system. They act independently from government control. 
A set of international standards, known as the Paris Principles,15 has been 
agreed to guide their independence and integrity.
Civil society as well as national human rights institutions contribute to the 
review of reports of State parties by submitting their own reports and briefing 
committees on the status of human rights protection in the State party whose 
report is under review. They contribute to the discussion of lists of issues, 
lists of issues prior to reporting, as well as to the constructive dialogue with 
the State party concerned, and to the adoption of recommendations. Their 
submissions enable committees to put the human rights situation in the State 
party in context. These organizations also follow up the national implementa -
tion of the recommendations of treaty bodies and can report on its success 
or failure. Their contributions to days of general discussions and general 
comments are also relevant.
More information on the role of NGOs in the work of specific committees 
can be found in  Working with the United Nations Human Rights Pro -
gramme: A Handbook for Civil Society. Additional information on the in -
teraction between NHRIs and treaty bodies is also available in  National 
15 General Assembly resolution 48/134.
44Human Rights Institutions: History, Principles, Roles and Responsibilities, 
Professional Training Series No. 4/Rev.1 (United Nations publication, 
Sales No. E.09.XIV.4) and on the OHCHR website at:
http://nhri.ohchr.org/EN/IHRS/TreatyBodies/Pages/default.aspx.
C. The contribution of the universal periodic review to the 
work of the treaty bodies
The universal periodic review (UPR) is the inter-State cooperative mechanism, 
established by the General Assembly in 2006 as one of the procedures of 
the Human Rights Council, to review the human rights performance of all 
States.
The mechanism is based on an interactive dialogue between the State under 
review and the member and observer States of the Council.
It operates on a four-and-a-half-year cycle and is composed of several stag -
es, including the preparation of the documents that reviews are based on, 
the review itself, and follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations. 
The second and subsequent cycles will focus especially on the implementa -
tion of the recommendations that States have accepted in the previous cycle 
and on further developments in their human rights situation. Civil society 
organizations, NHRIs and United Nations agencies actively participate in 
the process.
This review and the treaty bodies complement each other. The review has 
been extremely useful in bringing to the attention of State parties the need to 
submit their reports to the committees regularly and to implement their recom -
mendations. On their side the treaty bodies also remind State parties of the 
need to implement the recommendations of the universal periodic review.
D. The contribution of the special procedures to the work of 
the treaty bodies
“Special procedures” is the name given to the mechanisms established ini -
tially by the Commission on Human Rights and assumed since 2006 by the 
Human Rights Council to examine, monitor, advise and publicly report on 
human rights situations in specific countries or territories (country mandates), 
or on major phenomena of human rights violations worldwide (thematic man -
dates). As of February 2012, there are 45 special procedures (35 thematic 
mandates and 10 country mandates). Special procedure mandate holders 
are either individuals (known as “special rapporteurs” or “independent ex -
perts”) or working groups with five members, one from each region. They 
serve in their personal capacity and receive no remuneration. Their methods 
45of work include: acting on human rights concerns either in individual cases 
or on more general issues through direct communications with Governments; 
undertaking fact-finding missions to countries and issuing reports with rec -
ommendations; preparing thematic studies that provide information on the 
situation, clarify relevant norms and standards and provide guidance on their 
implementation; and raising public awareness through a variety of promo -
tional activities on issues within their mandates.
As a Charter-based mechanism of protection of human rights, special proce -
dures unlike the treaty bodies can be activated even if a State has not ratified 
any relevant instrument or treaty, and it is not necessary to have exhausted 
domestic remedies to access the special procedures.
Special procedures and treaty bodies complement each other. They regu -
larly share information and follow up on their respective recommendations: 
concerns raised by special procedures are taken into account by the treaty 
bodies and vice versa. They may also issue joint statements on key issues 
of international concern, and they sometimes hold joint meetings to discuss 
ways of improving and coordinating their work.
E. More information about the United Nations human 
rights treaty system
For more information about the treaties and the treaty bodies, visit the OHCHR 
website and click on “human rights bodies”. The site contains information on 
the State reporting process, including the reporting status by country. Treaty 
body documents, including State party reports and concluding observations, 
can be downloaded from the site.
OHCHR has published the following relevant fact sheets:
Combating Torture (No. 4);
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (No. 6/Rev.3);
Complaint Procedures (No. 7);
The Rights of the Child (No. 10);
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (No. 12);
Civil and Political Rights: The Human Rights Committee (No. 15);
The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (No. 16);
The Committee against Torture (No. 17);
Discrimination against Women: The Convention and the Committee  
(No. 22); and
46The International Convention on Migrant Workers and its Committee 
(No. 24/Rev.1).
These fact sheets are available free of charge from the OHCHR publications 
desk, or online at www.ohchr.org. Please note that some are being updated.
Newsletter
The Newsletter of the Human Rights Treaties Division has been a quarterly 
since 2008. It aims to provide more in-depth and specific information on 
the work of the treaty bodies and includes interviews, analysis of decisions, 
activities and reports from OHCHR field presences.16
16 The Newsletter is available from the OHCHR website:
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/treaty/newsletter_treaty_bodies.htm  
(accessed 28 February 2012).E-mail notification
If you are interested in the work of the treaty bodies and would like to be kept in -
formed about their activities, why not subscribe to the free e-mail updates from the 
OHCHR Civil Society Section? You will receive regular notification by e-mail of 
treaty body recommendations, including concluding observations, general com -
ments, decisions on individual complaints and other activities. To subscribe, visit 
www.ohchr.org/EN/AboutUs/Pages/CivilSociety.aspx.
47Annex I
Glossary of technical terms related to the treaty bodies
Backlog
Despite the problems of late and non-reporting by State parties, some 
treaty bodies have found it difficult to keep up with the high number of 
reports that they have to consider each year. The resulting backlog means 
up to two years may go by between the submission of a report by a State 
party and its examination by the committee. The need to request updated 
information is one reason for the practice of issuing lists of questions (see 
below). More efficient working methods can reduce the backlog, and 
some committees have proposed innovative approaches. The Commit -
tee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women, for example, occasionally meet in two 
parallel chambers.
Bureau
The bureau usually consists of the chair, the vice-chairs, the rapporteur or any 
other designated member of a committee, and meets to decide procedural 
and administrative matters related to that committee’s work.
Chair
Each treaty body elects one of its members to act as chair for a term of two 
years. He or she chairs each meeting in accordance with the agreed rules of 
procedure. The chairs of all the treaty bodies meet once a year to coordinate 
the activities of the treaty bodies.
Common core document
A document submitted by a State party to the Secretary-General containing 
information of a general nature about the country which is relevant to all 
the treaties, such as information on land and population, on the political  
structure, on the general legal framework within which human rights are 
protected in the State, and on non-discrimination, equality and effective rem -
edies. It constitutes the common initial part of all the State reports to the 
treaty bodies. The core document was introduced in 1991 by the meeting  
of chairpersons as a way of reducing some of the repetition in the reports. 
The guidelines for this document were reviewed in 2006 (HRI/GEN/2/
Rev.6).
48Concluding comments
See “concluding observations”.
Concluding observations
The observations and recommendations issued by a treaty body after it has 
considered a State party’s report. Concluding observations refer both to the 
positive aspects of a State’s implementation of the treaty and to areas of 
concern, where the treaty body recommends that further action needs to be 
taken by the State. The treaty bodies are committed to issuing concluding 
observations that are concrete, focused and implementable, and are paying 
increasing attention to measures to ensure effective follow-up to their conclud -
ing observations.
Consideration of a country situation in the absence  
of a report
See “review procedure”.
Constructive dialogue
The practice, adopted by all treaty bodies, of inviting State parties to send 
a delegation to the session at which their report will be considered in order 
to enable them to respond to members’ questions and provide additional 
information on their efforts to implement the provisions of the relevant treaty. 
The notion of constructive dialogue emphasizes the fact that the treaty bodies 
are not judicial bodies (even if some of their functions are quasi-judicial), but 
are created to review the implementation of the treaties.
Country rapporteur
Most committees appoint one or two members as country rapporteurs for 
each State party report under consideration. The country rapporteur usu -
ally takes the lead in drafting the list of issues, in putting questions to the 
delegation during the session, and in drafting concluding observations to be 
discussed and adopted by the committee.
Country task force
The Human Rights Committee has assigned the preparatory work for the 
consideration of reports, previously done in its pre-sessional working group, 
to country report task forces, which meet during the plenary session. The 
country report task force consists of four to six members, nominated by the 
chair and one of whom is the country rapporteur with overall responsibility 
for drafting the list of issues.
49Declaration
A State may choose, or be required, to make a declaration concerning a treaty 
to which it has become a party. There are several types of declarations:
•	 Interpretative	declarations
 A State may make a declaration about its understanding of a matter 
contained in, or the interpretation of, a particular provision in a treaty. 
Unlike reservations, such declarations do not purport to exclude or 
modify the legal effects of a treaty. The purpose is merely to clarify the 
State’s position as to the meaning of certain provisions or of the entire 
treaty.
•	 Optional	and	mandatory	declarations
 Treaties may provide for States to make optional and/or mandatory 
declarations. These declarations are legally binding on the declarants. 
Thus, for example, under article 41 of the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights, States may make an optional declaration that 
they accepts the Human Rights Committee’s competence to consider 
inter-State complaints. Similarly, State parties to the Optional Protocol to 
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children 
in armed conflict are required, under its article 3 (2), to make a bind -
ing declaration setting out the minimum age at which they will permit 
voluntary recruitment into their national armed forces and a description 
of the safeguards that they have adopted to ensure that such recruitment 
is not forced or coerced.
Derogation
A derogation is a measure adopted by a State party to partially suspend the 
application of one or more provisions of a treaty, at least temporarily. Some 
human rights treaties allow State parties, in a public emergency which threat -
ens the life of the nation, to derogate exceptionally and temporarily from a 
number of rights to the extent strictly required by the situation. The State party, 
however, may not derogate from certain specific rights and may not take 
discriminatory measures. States are generally obliged to inform other State 
parties of such derogations and give reasons for the derogations, and to set 
a date on which the derogation will expire. (See the Human Rights Commit -
tee’s general comment No. 29 (2001).)
Follow-up procedures
The procedures put in place to ensure that State parties act on the recommen -
dations contained in the concluding observations of the treaty bodies or their 
50decisions on cases brought under the complaints procedures. The Committee 
against Torture, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 
the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Elimination of Dis -
crimination against Women have adopted formal follow-up procedures, and 
all committees require States to address follow-up in their periodic reports. 
Parliaments, the judiciary, NHRIs, NGOs and civil society, all have an im -
portant role to play in follow-up.
General comment
A treaty body’s interpretation of human rights treaty provisions, thematic 
issues or its methods of work. General comments often seek to clarify the 
reporting duties of State parties with respect to certain provisions and sug -
gest approaches to implementing treaty provisions. Also called "general 
recommendation" (Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
and Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women).
General recommendation
See “general comment”.
Human Rights Treaties Division
Within OHCHR, the Human Rights Treaties Division provides secretariat sup -
port to all the treaty bodies and the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims 
of Torture. It is based in Palais Wilson, Geneva.
Individual communication
See “individual complaint”.
Individual complaint
A formal complaint, from an individual who claims that her or his rights 
under one of the treaties have been violated by a State party, which most 
of the treaty bodies are competent to consider. The right of the treaty bodies 
to consider individual complaints must be expressly conceded by the State 
party concerned in one of three ways:
(a) By making a declaration under the relevant article of the treaty (this 
procedure applies to the International Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention against Torture 
and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families);
51(b) By ratifying or acceding to the treaty itself (this procedure applies 
to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance; or
(c) By ratifying or acceding to the relevant optional protocol to a treaty 
providing for a right of individual complaint (this procedure applies 
to the two International Covenants, the Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities).
Late reporting
Each treaty envisages regular submission of reports by its State parties; in 
practice, many States find it difficult to keep up with their reporting obliga -
tions in strict conformity with the periodicity foreseen in the treaties to which 
they are parties. Late reporting has been identified as one of the main chal -
lenges facing the treaty reporting system and the treaty bodies have been 
seeking ways to make it easier for States to report, for instance through 
streamlining the reporting process.
Information on the reporting status of the State parties to each treaty is avail -
able from the treaty body database on the OHCHR website.
List of issues and/or questions
A list of issues or questions, formulated by a treaty body on the basis of a 
State party report and other information available to it (information from  
United Nations specialized agencies, NHRIs, NGOs, etc.), which is 
transmitted to the State party in advance of the session at which the treaty 
body will consider the report. The list of issues provides the framework for 
a constructive dialogue with the State party’s delegation. Some commit -
tees encourage State parties to submit written responses beforehand, al -
lowing the dialogue to move more quickly to specificities. The list of issues 
provides a source of up-to-date information for a committee with regard to 
a State whose report may have been awaiting consideration for as much 
as two years.
List of issues prior to reporting
A list of issues submitted by the Committee against Torture or the Human 
Rights Committee to a State party preparing to submit its periodic report so 
as to facilitate this preparation. The State party’s response to this list of issues 
constitutes its report to one of these two treaty bodies.
52List of themes
A list of themes or topics for which no responses are required, intended to 
guide and focus the dialogue between a State party’s delegation and the 
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination during the considera -
tion of the State party’s report.
National human rights institutions
Many countries have created national human rights institutions (NHRIs) 
to promote and protect human rights. Such institutions are increasingly  
recognized as an important part of any national human rights protection 
system, provided their independence from government control can be as -
sured. A set of international standards, known as the Paris Principles, has 
been agreed by which to gauge the independence and integrity of NHRIs.
For more information on NHRIs, see  National Human Rights Institutions: 
History, Principles, Roles and Responsibilities, Professional Training Series  
No. 4/Rev.1 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.XIV.4).
Non-governmental organizations
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) may be involved in promoting hu -
man rights, either generally or with a focus on a specific issue. A framework 
exists for the participation of NGOs in many United Nations human rights 
mechanisms, such as the granting of consultative status with the Economic 
and Social Council, which allows them to participate in the Human Rights 
Council. Both international and national NGOs follow the work of the treaty 
bodies closely and most treaty bodies provide them with an opportunity to 
contribute to the reporting process through the submission, for example, of 
additional information relating to the implementation of the treaties in a par -
ticular country (sometimes referred to as “alternative” or “parallel” reports). 
There are differences in the way the treaty bodies treat this information.
International and national NGOs also have an important role in following 
up the implementation of the treaty bodies’ recommendations contained in 
their concluding observations at the national level and in fostering national 
public debate on human rights implementation when the report is drafted 
and afterwards. NGOs have also made an important contribution to pro -
moting the ratification of the human rights treaties worldwide.
Non-reporting
Despite having freely assumed the legal obligations attached to the human 
rights treaties that they have ratified, some States fail to submit their reports 
53to the treaty bodies. There may be many reasons why States fail to report, 
ranging from war and civil strife to limited resources. Technical assistance is 
available from OHCHR to assist States in meeting their reporting obliga -
tions. The treaty bodies have also adopted procedures to ensure that the 
implementation of the treaties by non-reporting States parties is reviewed, if 
the latter have not responded to a treaty body’s requests for information. In 
particular, committees are prepared to consider the situation in a country in 
the absence of a report.
Information on the reporting status of the State parties to each treaty is avail -
able from the treaty body database on the OHCHR website or in HRI/
GEN/4, which is updated annually. The website also provides information 
on the technical assistance available to State parties.
Optional protocol
An international instrument which is linked to a principal instrument and im -
poses additional legal obligations on States that choose to accept them. Op -
tional protocols may be drafted at the same time as the main treaty or after 
the main treaty has entered into force. Optional protocols to the human rights 
treaties have been adopted for a number of reasons: to allow State parties 
to sign up to additional obligations relating to international monitoring of 
implementation (first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, optional protocols to the Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, to the Convention against 
Torture, to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and to 
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a commu -
nications procedure); to allow States to assume additional obligations that 
were not in the main treaty (Second Optional Protocol to the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights); or to address particular problems in 
more detail (the first two optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child).
Periodicity
The timetable for the submission of initial and periodic reports by State par -
ties to the treaty bodies is set out in each treaty or decided by the individual 
committees in accordance with the terms of the treaty. An initial report is 
required within a fixed period after the treaty enters into force for the State 
concerned; periodic reports are then required at regular intervals. The peri-
odicity  differs from treaty to treaty. (See table in chap. II, sect. C.)
54Petitions
A collective term embracing the various procedures for bringing complaints 
before treaty bodies. Petitions may consist of complaints from individuals al -
leging violations of a treaty by a State party or from State parties alleging 
violations of a treaty by another State party (inter-State complaints).
Pre-sessional working group
A working group convened by some treaty bodies before or after each ple -
nary session in order to plan their work for future sessions. The work of the 
pre-sessional working groups differs from committee to committee: some 
draft lists of issues and questions to be submitted to each State party before 
its report is considered; some committees with competence to consider 
individual complaints use their working groups to make initial recommen -
dations on cases and other matters related to the complaints procedures. 
Pre-sessional working groups usually meet in closed session.
Recommendation
A formal recommendation or decision issued by a treaty body. The term has 
been used inconsistently to describe formal decisions on specific matters or 
resolutions of a more general nature, such as those resulting from a day of 
general discussion. Concluding observations contain specific recommenda -
tions and the term “treaty body recommendation” is sometimes used synony -
mously with “concluding observation”. The Committee on the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women also refer to their general comments as “general recom -
mendations”.
Reporting guidelines for State parties
Written guidelines produced for State parties by each treaty body on the 
form and content of the reports that States are obliged to submit under the 
relevant treaty. Some committees provide detailed guidance article by arti -
cle, whereas others give more general guidance (see HRI/GEN/2/Rev.6).
Reservation
A reservation is a statement, however phrased or named, made by a State 
by which it purports to exclude or alter the legal effect of certain provisions 
of a treaty in their application to that State. A reservation may enable a State 
to participate in a multilateral treaty in which it would otherwise be unable or 
unwilling to do so. States can make reservations to a treaty when they sign, 
55ratify, accept, approve or accede to it. When a State makes a reservation 
upon signing, it must confirm the reservation upon ratification, acceptance 
or approval.
Reservations are governed by the Vienna Convention on the Law of  
Treaties, and cannot be contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty. 
Consequently, when signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to 
a treaty, States may make a reservation unless (a) the reservation is prohib -
ited by the treaty; or (b) the treaty provides that only certain reservations may 
be made and these do not include the reservation in question. Other State 
parties may lodge objections to a State party’s reservations. Reservations 
may be withdrawn completely or partially by the State party at any time.
Review procedure
A procedure by which a treaty body will consider the situation in a country in 
the absence of a report from the State party. The procedure is used if a report 
is long overdue and the State party has not responded to the treaty body’s re -
minders. In many cases, State parties submit their reports to avoid the review 
procedure; in others, they send a delegation to the treaty body’s session and 
answer questions from the treaty body even though they have not been able 
to submit a report. The review procedure was first adopted by the Committee 
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in 1991. Other committees use 
the expression “consideration of country situation in the absence of a State 
report”. Some committees forward a list of issues to the State party, even 
though there is no report. Most committees produce concluding observations 
at the end of the process, although these may be kept confidential temporar -
ily should the State party wish to submit its report.
Rules of procedure
The formal rules adopted by a treaty body to govern the way in which it 
undertakes its business. With the exception of the Committee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights, committees are empowered by their respective 
treaties to adopt their own rules of procedure. These usually cover such mat -
ters as the election of officers and the procedures for adopting decisions 
especially if no consensus can be reached. Rules of procedure are related 
to, but distinct from, working methods.
Secretary/secretariat
Each treaty requires the Secretary-General of the United Nations to provide 
secretariat support to its treaty body. Every treaty body has a secretariat, 
consisting of a secretary and other international civil servants, based within 
56the United Nations Secretariat, who manage the agenda of the committee 
and coordinate its programme of work. The secretariats of all treaty bodies 
are based in Geneva at OHCHR.
Specialized agencies, funds and programmes
The various specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Na -
tions system that carry out much of the work of the United Nations, including 
promoting and protecting human rights. All treaty bodies permit United Na -
tions agencies to provide additional country information in the context of the 
consideration of a particular State report. Some specialized agencies also 
provide technical assistance to States, both in the implementation of treaty 
obligations and in the writing of reports for the treaty bodies. Some of the 
United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes involved in 
the human rights treaty system are: the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations, the International Labour Organization, the Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Na -
tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations 
Population Fund, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United 
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women, and the World Health Organization. United 
Nations country teams also participate increasingly in the work of human 
rights treaty bodies.
State party report
The report that each State party to a human rights treaty is required, under 
the provisions of that treaty, to submit regularly to the treaty body, indicating 
the measures it has adopted to implement the treaty and the difficulties it has 
encountered. All treaties require a comprehensive initial report within a fixed 
time after ratification and, with the exception of the International Convention 
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, also subse -
quent periodic reports at regular intervals.
Targeted or focused report
See “treaty-specific report”.
Treaty, convention, covenant or instrument
Legally, there is no difference between a treaty, a convention or a covenant. 
All are international legal instruments which, in international law, legally 
57bind those States that choose to accept the obligations contained in them by 
becoming a party in accordance with the final clauses of these instruments.
Treaty body or committee
A committee of independent experts appointed to review the implementation 
by State parties of a core international human rights treaty. The treaties use 
the term “committee” throughout, but the committees are widely known as 
“treaty bodies” because they are created in accordance with the provisions 
of the treaty which they oversee. In many important respects, they are inde -
pendent of the United Nations system, although they receive support from the 
United Nations Secretariat and report to the General Assembly. Sometimes 
also called "treaty-monitoring body".
Treaty-specific report/document
The common core document is submitted to a treaty body in tandem with 
a targeted treaty-specific document, focusing on issues related specifically 
to the treaty concerned. Although often referred to as a “treaty-specific re -
port”, the report to each treaty body in fact consist of a common document, 
which is the same for all committees, and a treaty-specific document for each 
specific treaty body. The two documents, read together, constitute the State 
party’s report.
Working methods
The procedures and practices developed by each treaty body to facilitate 
its work. Such practices are not always formally adopted in the rules of 
procedure. Each treaty body’s working methods change in response to the 
workload and other factors. In recent years, there has been a move, through 
the annual meeting of chairpersons, to streamline and harmonize working 
methods, especially if the different approaches of the committees cause con -
fusion and inconsistency.
Written response/replies to list of issues
A State party’s written replies to a treaty body’s list of issues and questions 
submitted before the session at which its report will be considered. Written 
responses to a list of issues supplement the State party report or bring it up 
to date.
                      
58Annex II
How a State becomes a party to a treaty
This annex explains the process by which a State binds itself by the provi -
sions of a treaty in international law as a State party. Further details may be 
obtained from the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs (http://untreaty.
un.org).
State party
A State party is a State which has agreed to be bound by a treaty under 
international law. The State must have expressed its consent to be bound by 
the treaty through an act of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession , 
and the date of entry into force  of the treaty for that particular State must 
have passed. Some treaties, such as the human rights treaties described in 
this Fact Sheet, are open only to States, whereas others are also open to 
other entities with treaty-making capacity. Both Covenants and the Interna -
tional Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 
are open to signature and ratification by "any State Member of the United 
Nations or member of any of its specialized agencies, by any State Party to 
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and by any other State which 
has been invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations". The other 
core human rights treaties are open to all States. The optional protocols are 
all restricted to the State parties to the parent treaty, except the Optional 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of 
children in armed conflict, to which any State may accede.
How does a State become a party to a treaty?
Each human rights treaty contains provisions setting out, first, how States must 
proceed to bind themselves by the substantive provisions of the treaty and, 
second, when the treaty will enter into force.
In order to become a party to a multilateral treaty, a State must demonstrate, 
through a concrete act, its willingness to abide by the legal rights and obli -
gations contained in the treaty. In other words, it must express its consent to 
be bound by it. In accordance with the final clauses of the relevant treaty, 
a State can do this either through signature  followed by ratification, accep-
tance or approval , or through accession . Under certain circumstances, a 
State may also bind itself through succession .
Many treaties require a minimum number of State parties before they can 
enter into force in international law.
59Signature
Multilateral treaties, like the human rights treaties, usually provide for sig -
nature subject to ratification, acceptance or approval . In such cases, the 
act of signing does not impose legal obligations on the State. However, 
signature does indicate the State’s intention to take steps to be bound by 
the treaty at a later date. In other words, signature is a preparatory step 
on the way to ratification. Signature also creates an obligation to refrain 
in good faith from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the 
treaty.
Providing for signature subject to ratification gives States time to seek do -
mestic approval for the treaty and enact any legislation necessary to imple -
ment the treaty domestically, before undertaking the international obligations 
under the treaty.
Ratification, acceptance or approval
Definitive acts, undertaken at the international level, whereby a State es -
tablishes its consent to be bound by a treaty which it has already signed . 
It does this by depositing an “instrument of ratification” with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. To ratify a treaty, the State must have 
signed the treaty first; if a State expresses its consent to be bound without 
first having signed the treaty, the process is called accession  (see below). 
Upon ratification, the State becomes legally bound by the treaty as one of 
its State parties.
Generally, there is no time limit within which a State is requested to ratify a 
treaty which it has signed. Once a State has ratified a treaty at the interna -
tional level, it must give effect to it domestically.
Ratification at the international level, which indicates to the international com -
munity a State’s commitment to undertake the obligations under a treaty, 
should not be confused with ratification at the national level, which a State 
may be required to undertake in accordance with its own constitutional pro -
visions before it expresses consent to be bound internationally. Ratification 
at the national level is insufficient to establish a State’s intention to be legally 
bound at the international level.
Accession
Accession is the act whereby a State that has not signed a treaty expresses 
its consent to become a party to that treaty by depositing an "instrument of 
accession" with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Accession has 
the same legal effect as ratification, acceptance or approval . However, 
60unlike ratification, which must be preceded by signature  to create binding 
legal obligations under international law, accession requires only one step, 
namely, the deposit of an instrument of accession.
The conditions under which accession may occur and the procedure in -
volved depend on the provisions of the treaty. Accession is generally used 
by States wishing to express their consent to be bound by a treaty for which 
the deadline for signature has passed. However, many modern multilateral 
treaties provide for accession even when the treaty remains open for sig -
nature.
Succession
Succession takes place only if a State, which is a party to a treaty, has un -
dergone a major constitutional transformation which raises some doubt as 
to whether the original expression of consent to be bound is still valid. Such 
circumstances may include independence (for example, through decoloni -
zation), dissolution of a federation or union, and secession of a State or 
entity from a State or federation. The successor State may ratify or accede 
to the treaty in its own capacity or, alternatively, it may express its consent 
to continue to be bound by the legal obligations assumed by the original 
State party with respect to the same territory through an act of succession. In 
such cases, the State will notify the 
United Nations Secretary-General 
of its intention to succeed to the le -
gal obligations.
Distinction between  
ratification/accession  
and entry into force
The act by which a State (or, for 
some treaties, also a regional in -
tegration organization, such as 
the European Union) expresses its 
consent to be bound by a treaty is 
distinct from the treaty’s entry into 
force. A State demonstrates its 
willingness to undertake the legal 
rights and obligations under a trea -
ty through the deposit of an instru -
ment of ratification, acceptance , 
approval or accession. Entry into 
force of a treaty with regard to a Why is the date of entry into 
force important?
It is the date on which the rights set 
out in the treaty become binding on 
the State in international law. Anyone 
wishing to bring a complaint against a 
State party before a treaty body under 
the terms of a treaty or optional proto -
col needs to make sure that the treaty 
or optional protocol has entered into 
force for that State. This date also de -
termines when State parties must sub -
mit reports to the treaty bodies.
How do I find out whether a 
treaty is in force for a  
particular State?
The definitive source is the United Na -
tions Treaty Section, which maintains 
a register of multilateral treaties de -
posited with the Secretary-General. Its 
website is http://untreaty.un.org.
61State is the moment the treaty actually becomes legally binding on it. The 
treaty does not enter into force immediately; it usually takes some time, as 
specified in the treaty.
Entry into force
Entry into force of a treaty is the moment when a treaty becomes legally 
binding on its parties. The provisions of the treaty determine the moment of  
its entry into force, usually after a month or so. There are two types of entry 
into force: definitive entry into force of the treaty as an international legal 
instrument; and specific entry into force for a particular State.
•	 Definitive	entry	into	force
 Definitive entry into force is when a new treaty becomes a legally binding 
instrument for those States that have already expressed their consent to 
be bound by its provisions. Most treaties stipulate that they will enter into 
force after a specified number of instruments of ratification, approval, ac -
ceptance or accession have been deposited with the Secretary-General. 
Until that date, the treaty cannot legally bind any State, even those that 
have ratified or acceded to it (although they are obliged to refrain in 
good faith from acts that would defeat its object and purpose).
•	 Entry	into	force	for	a	State
 Once a treaty has entered into force generally, additional provisions 
determine when the treaty will enter into force for any other State (or 
regional integration organization) that wishes to be bound by it.
Dates
Consequently, there may be several dates attached to a treaty in relation to 
a given State:
Date of definitive entry into force of the treaty : the date, set in the treaty, at 
which the treaty enters generally into force in international law and becomes 
binding on States that have already taken the necessary measures.
Date of signature : the date on which a State signs the treaty. This has no 
legal effect other than to oblige the State to refrain from actions that would 
defeat the object and purpose of the treaty.
Date of deposit of instrument of ratification or accession : the date on which 
the United Nations treaty depositary receives the legal instrument that ex -
presses the State’s consent to be bound by the treaty.
62Date of entry into force for a State : the date, established in the treaty, on 
which the treaty becomes formally binding on the State in international law. 
Most treaties require a set period to elapse after the date of deposit of in -
strument before the treaty becomes binding. The precise period varies from 
treaty to treaty.
63Calculation of date of entry into force of the treaties
Treaty AdoptedEntered into 
force onEnters into force for State  
parties
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of  
Racial Discrimination21 December 
19654 January 
1969on 30th day after date  
of deposit
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights16 December 
19663 January 
1976three months after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	International	Covenant	on  
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights10 December 
2008(not yet in 
force)one month after date  
of deposit
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights16 December 
196623 March 
1976three months after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	International	Covenant	on	Civil	and	
Political Rights16 December 
196623 March 
1976three months after date  
of deposit
•		Second	Optional	Protocol	to	the	International	Covenant	on	
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death 
penalty15 December 
198911 July  
1991three months after date  
of deposit
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women18 December 
19793 September 
1981on 30th day after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	on	the	Elimination	of	All	
Forms of Discrimination against Women6 October 
199922 December 
2000three months after date  
of deposit
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or  
Degrading Treatment or Punishment10 December 
198426 June  
1987on 30th day after date  
of deposit 
64•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	against	Torture	and	
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment18 December 
200222 June  
2006one month after date  
of deposit
Convention on the Rights of the Child 20 November 
19892 September 
1990on 30th day after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	on	the	Rights	of	the	
Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child 
pornography25 May 2000 18 January 
2002one month after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	on	the	Rights	of	the	
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict25 May 2000 12 February 
2002one month after date  
of deposit
•		Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	on	the	Rights	of	the	
Child on a communications procedure19 December 
2011(not yet in 
force)one month after date  
of deposit
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families18 December 
19901 July  
2003on 1st day of month following a 
period of three months after date 
of deposit
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 18 December 
20063 May  
2008on 30th day after date  
of deposit
•	Optional	Protocol	to	the	Convention	on	the	Rights  
of Persons with Disabilities18 December 
20063 May  
2008one month after date  
of deposit
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance20 December 
200623 December 
2010on 30th day after date  
of deposit
65Human Rights Fact Sheets:*17
No. 35 The Right to Water  
No. 34 The Right to Adequate Food  
No. 33 Frequently Asked Questions on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  
No. 32 Human Rights, Terrorism and Counter-terrorism  
No. 31 The Right to Health  
No. 30 The United Nations Human Rights Treaty System (Rev.1)  
No. 29 Human Rights Defenders: Protecting the Right to Defend Human   
 Rights  
No. 28 The Impact of Mercenary Activities on the Right of Peoples to Self- 
 determination  
No. 27 Seventeen Frequently Asked Questions about United Nations  
 Special Rapporteurs  
No. 26 The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention  
No. 25 Forced Evictions and Human Rights  
No. 24 The International Convention on Migrant Workers and its Commit 
 tee (Rev.1)  
No. 23  Harmful Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and  
 Children  
No. 22 Discrimination against Women: The Convention and the Committee  
No. 21 The Right to Adequate Housing (Rev.1)  
No. 20 Human Rights and Refugees  
No. 19 National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human   
 Rights  
No. 18 Minority Rights (Rev.1)  
No. 17 The Committee against Torture  
No. 16 The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Rev.1)  
No. 15 Civil and Political Rights: The Human Rights Committee (Rev.1)  
No. 14 Contemporary Forms of Slavery  
No. 13 International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights  
No. 12 The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination  
No. 11 Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions (Rev.1)  
No. 10 The Rights of the Child (Rev.1)  
No. 9 The Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Rev.1)  
No. 7 Complaint Procedures (Rev.1)  
No. 6 Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (Rev.3)  
No. 4 Combating Torture (Rev.1)  
No. 3 Advisory Services and Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human  
 Rights (Rev.1)  
No. 2 The International Bill of Human Rights (Rev.1)  
* Fact sheets Nos. 1, 5 and 8 are no longer issued. All fact sheets are available online from 
www.ohchr.org.


68The Human Rights Fact Sheet  series is published by the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, United Nations Office at 
Geneva. It deals with selected questions of human rights that are under ac -
tive consideration or are of particular interest.
Human Rights Fact Sheets  are intended to assist an ever-wider audience in 
better understanding basic human rights, what the United Nations is doing 
to promote and protect them, and the international machinery available to 
help realize those rights. Human Rights Fact Sheets  are free of charge and 
distributed worldwide.
Enquiries should be addressed to:
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
United Nations Office at Geneva
8–14, Avenue de la Paix
CH–1211 Geneva 10
Switzerland
New York Office:
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
United Nations
New York, NY 10017
United States of America
Printed at United Nations, Geneva   ISSN 1014-5567
GE.12-42658–August 2012–6,336
30The United Nations
Human Rights Treaty System
Fact Sheet No.
Rev.1

