 
GE.25 -15926  (E)     051125    061125  
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  
  General comment No. 27 (2025) on economic, social and 
cultural rights and  the environmental dimension of 
sustainable development * 
 I. Introduction  
1. A clean, healthy and sustainable environment  is an essential precondition for the 
enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. Nature is indispensable to human existence 
and well -being, as it not only supports life but also underpins ecological processes , including 
air and water quality, soil fertility, climate stability, pollination , and the mitigation of natural 
hazards . However, the accelerating and interconnected environmental challenges of our time, 
such as climate change, biodiversity loss an d pollution, pose a serious threat to the ability  of 
present and future generations to enjoy  economic, social and cultural rights,  and are already 
contribut ing to violations of these rights . Climate change, driven by human activities, is 
increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events  globally , such as heatwaves, 
heavy precipitation  and floods , droughts, and tropical cyclones , and is causing slow -onset 
changes, including rising sea levels .1 Key ecological processes are becoming increasingly  
disrupted or weakened, and biodiversity is rapidly declining at both the species and  the 
ecosystem levels due to the compounding effects of climate change, land and sea use changes, 
overexploitation of resources, pollution, and unsound management of chemicals and waste.2 
2. The situation is increasingly alarming, as these interlinked environmental c rises 
“increase the risk of reaching irreversible biophysical tipping points that threaten 
fundamental ecological systems and processes that sustain life ”.3 These planetary  
environmental threats  are driven by unsustainable levels of production and consumption, 
particularly by developed States which  have  historically contributed most to environmental 
degradation and climate change , and are shaped by enduring re lations of domination over  
both nature and people , deeply rooted in colonial -era resource extraction .4 At the current rate 
of resource  exploitation , polluti on and environmental destruction, without re gard for  the 
Earth’s environmental limits , it is impossible to achieve the equal realization  of Covenant 
rights for all . Unsustainable use of natural resources and the resulting environmental 
  
 * Adopted by the Committee at its seventy -eighth session (8 –26 September 2025).  
 1  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report, Contribution 
of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change , pp. 5–7. 
 2  Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem service s, 
IPBES/7/10/Add.1, pp. 5  and 6. 
 3  Summary for policymakers of the thematic assessment of the underlying causes of biodiversity loss 
and the determinants of transformative change and options for achieving the 2050 Vision for 
Biodiversity, IPBES/11/12/Add.2, p. 5.  
 4  Ibid., pp. 6 and 14 .  United Nations  E/C.12/GC/27  
 Economic and Social Council  Distr.: General  
6 November 2025  
 
Original: English  

E/C.12/GC/27  
2 GE.25 -15926  degradation often drive armed conflict and instability, which are in turn exacerbated by 
them.5 
3. Individuals, groups and countries , including victims of colonialism , the slave trade  
and apartheid , that have historically contributed the least to the environmental crisis are often 
the most affected by it , and the least able to cope with its adverse impact s. Indigenous Peoples, 
peasants and other communities with deep connections to nature are among the first to 
experience  its devastating consequences. Moreover, environmental degradation exacerbates 
one of the greatest global challenges  – to eradicat e poverty and end hunger and malnutrition  
– and fuels migration and refugee cris es. This underscores  the interlinkages between the 
economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development.  These 
interconnected challenges call for enhanced guidance on implementing economic, social and 
cultural rights, placing the human dignity of present and future generations , along with 
environmental justice , at the centre.  
4. The present  general comment highlights the adverse impacts of environmental 
degradation on economic, social and cultural rights, and clarifies the obligations of States 
Parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights with re gard to 
the environmental dimension of sustainable development. I n it, the Committee  seeks to 
provide  guidance on implementing these rights in a manner that respects  ecological limits  
and the finite nature of natural  resources.  
 II. Scope and method of interpretation  
5. Sustainable development seeks to realize the rights of all human beings to an adequate 
standard of living on the basis of their active, free and meaningful participation in 
development and the fair distribution of the benefits resulting therefrom, without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs .6 It requires a 
balanced and integrated approach across its economic , social and environmental dimensions. 
In its practice, the Committee has underscored the close linkages between the Covenant and 
sustainable development.7 It has emphasized that the full realization of  economic, social and 
cultural rights  for all, especially  for those in disadvantaged and marginalized situations, is 
critical to achieving sustainable development.8 At the same time, it has recognized that 
protecting the environment is indispensable for realiz ing these rights.  
6. The Committee recognizes that t he right to a clean, healthy and sustainable 
environment is an autonomous human right, indispensable for the effective enjoyment of all 
rights enshrined in the Covenant . This right is both inherent in the Covenant as a whole and 
derived from specific Covenant rights , including the rights to health,9 to an adequate standard 
of living and to participat ion in cultural life.10 The right to a healthy environment was also 
explicitly recogni zed by the General Assembly in 2022,11 and has since been acknowledged 
by the Conferences of the Parties to both the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversit y.12 
7. While many individuals and groups, particularly those in vulnerable and marginalized 
situations, are already experiencing serious impact s on their Covenant rights owing  to 
environmental degradation, these impacts will likely intensify over time. In the absence of 
urgent and sustained action, future generations will bear an even greater burden, with 
  
 5  A/79/270 , paras. 84 and 85.  
 6  A/42/427 , p. 24.  
 7  E/2003/22 -E/C.12/2002/13 , annex VI, paras. 2 and 4; and E/C.12/2012/1 , para. 5. 
 8  E/C.12/2019/1 , paras. 4 and 5.  
 9  General comment No. 14 (2000), paras. 11, 15 and 36.  
 10  General comment No. 21 (2009) , para. 16.  
 11  General Assembly resolution 76/300.  
 12  Sharm el -Sheikh Implementation Plan, decision 1/CMA.4 (2022), preamble; outcome of the first 
global stocktake, decision 1/CMA.5 (2023), preamble ; Kunming -Montreal Global Biodiversity 
Framework, decision 15/4 (2022), annex, para. 7 (g) ; Committee on the Rights of the Child, general 
comment No. 26 (2023) , para. 8; and International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of 
Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , 23 July 2025, para. 393. 
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  3 diminished opportunities to realize their rights under the Covenant. Ensuring the progressive 
realization of Covenant rights therefore requires an intergenerational perspective, grounded 
in the equitable sharing of rights  and responsibilities, and of resources across generations.  
8. Structural inequalities persist at both the national and the international  levels. Unequal  
access to natural resources, land, and public goods and services, as well as State policy and 
decision -making processes , remain  barrier s to sustainable development. To ensure the 
realization of Covenant rights for all, these inequalities must be over come in a manner that 
fully respects the principles of non -discrimination and substantive equality. Current global 
economic structures remain shaped by past and present  imbalances in production and 
consumption  patterns , whereby developing countries continue to bear the environmental 
burdens of extraction and production, while developed countries disproportionately benefit 
economically.13 These structural asymmetries may undermine the ability of many poorer 
countries to transition away from fossil fuel -dependent economies while ensuring the 
enjoyment of Covenant rights.14 Fulfilling the obligation of international assistance and 
cooperation under the Covenant, together with the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities under relevant treaties and general international 
law, is essen tial to addressing these inequities and achieving sustainable development.  
9. When clarifying the obligations of States Parties to realize Covenant rights in relation 
to the environmental dimension of sustainable development, international environmental law 
must be taken into account, in accordance with article 31 (3) (c) of the Vie nna Convention 
on the Law of Treaties.15 In turn, States Parties must fulfil the ir obligations under 
international human rights law, including the Covenant, when implementing their obligations 
under international environmental law.  
10. The interpretation and implementation of the Covenant in the context of 
environmental degradation should be guided by the general obligations and foundational 
principles  therein, which includ e the progressive realization of rights and the use of the 
maximum available resources, and the principles of equality and non -discrimination, 
meaningful participation,  access to information, access to justice,  and international assistance 
and cooperation. This framework  should be further  informed by both the right to a clean, 
healthy and sustainable environment , and the right to development, which entails meeting 
developmental and environmental needs equitably across generations.16 Relevant  rules of 
international environmental law, including the principle s of intergenerational equity ,17 
common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities,18 and precaution19 
should also guide interpretation.  The full realization of Covenant rights demands a just 
transition towards a sustainable econom y that puts human rights and the well -being of the 
planet  at its centre . 
  
 13  A/HRC/57/30 , para. 6.  
 14  A/HRC/54/27 , paras. 50 –52; and A/HRC/44/44 , paras. 29–32. 
 15  Human Rights Committee, general comment No. 36 (2018), para. 62; Inter -American Court of 
Human Rights , advisory opinion OC -23/17 of 15 November 2017 on the environment and human 
rights, para. 44; and European Court of Human Rights, Verein Klimaseniorinnen Schweiz et al. v. 
Switzerland  (application No. 53600/ 20), judgment of 9 April 2024 , para. 434. 
 16  Declaration on Future Generations; Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, para. 11; and 
Declaration on the Right to Development.  
 17  Rio Declaration, principle 3; Paris Agreement, preamble; and Convention on Bio logical D iversity, 
preamble and art. 2.  
 18  Rio Declaration, principle 7; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, art. 3 (1); 
and Paris Agreement, art. 2 (2).  
 19  Rio Declaration, principle 15; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , art. 3 (3); 
and Convention on Biological Diversity, preamble.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
4 GE.25 -15926   III. Obligations of States Parties under the Covenant in the 
context of environmental degradation  
 A. General obligations  
  Obligations to respect, protect and fulfil  
11. States Parties have obligations to respect, protect and fulfil Covenant rights. In the 
context of environmental degradation, the obligation to respect requires States Parties  to 
refrain from acts that foreseeably contribute to or cause significant harms to the air, land, 
water, the oceans, climate stability, biodiversity and ecosystems. The obligation to protect 
requires States Parties  to prevent environmental harms that could result in violations of 
Covenant rights , including by regulating the activiti es of other actors , such as business 
entities,  under their jurisdiction or control. This also  requires States Parties to exercise due 
diligence in protecting Covenant rights from environmental harm , applying a standard of 
diligence proportionate to the degree of the risk,20 and entails adopti ng all appropriate and 
necessary measures to safeguard the enjoyment of these rights from environmental threats 
caused or exacerbated by human activities,  such as sea -level rise, water scarcity, floods, 
droughts, desertification, land degradation, deforestation, pollution of air, water and soil , and 
storms.  Where there is a risk  of serious and irreversible environmental harm affecting 
Covenant rights, States Parties should apply the precautionary principle and take all measures 
necessary to prevent such harm even in the absence of scientif ic certaint y.21 The obligation 
to fulfil requires States Parties to take appropriate legislative, administrative, financial, 
judicial and other measures to ensure the enjoyment of Covenant rights, including through 
the preservation, protection and restoration of ecosystem s essential to those rights. This 
includes securing clean air, a safe climate, fertile land, and healthy ecosystems, including 
forests and wetlands, and the integrity of rivers and oceans.22 
12. While businesses can contribute to human rights and sustainable development, certain 
activities – such as fossil fuel extraction and use, large -scale mining, deforestation, and other 
practices leading to resource depletion and pollution – can significa ntly undermine the 
enjoyment of Covenant rights . States Parties  must adopt legislative, administrative, 
educational and other appropriate measures to ensure effective protection against 
business -related violations of Covenant rights, including by establish ing regulatory 
frameworks to oversee and monitor business activities. Effective  mechanisms must also be 
in place to ensure accountability and provide redress to victims of business -related human 
rights abuses.23 In addition, States Parties should have a legal framework that requires 
business entities to  exercise human rights and environmental due diligence to identify, 
monitor, prevent,  mitigate and remedy adverse  environmental impacts on Covenant rights 
arising from their decisions, operations and value chains.24 
13. Given  the interdependent and indivisible nature of all human  rights , States Parties 
must ensure the full enjoyment of procedural guarantees in environmental matters, including 
those concerning climate change mitigation, adaptation and reparation, access to information, 
inclusive and meaningful public participation in all re levant planning and decision -making 
processes, and access to justice and effective remedies.25 When Indigenous Peoples are 
  
 20  Inter -American Court of Human Rights, Inhabitants of La Oroya v. Peru , judgment of 27 November 
2023, p ara. 126; I nternational Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, advisory opinion of 21 May 2024 on 
climate change and international law, para. 239; Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory 
opinion OC -32/25 of 29 May 2025 on the climate emergency  and human rights , paras . 232–235; and 
International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , 
paras. 280 –300. 
 21  General comment No. 25 (2020), para.  56; and Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory 
opinion OC -23/17 , para. 242. 
 22  General comments No. 26 (2022), para. 38; and No. 15 (2002) , para. 28. 
 23  A/HRC/17/31 , annex, para. 25.  
 24  General comments No. 24 (2017) , para. 16; and No. 26 (2022) , para. 30. 
 25  General comment No. 25 (2020 ), paras. 53–56; Rio Declaration, principle 10; Aarhus Convention; 
and Escazú Agreement.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  5 affected,  their rights to free, prior and informed consent must be respected and protected.26 
States Parties should respect, protect and promote the work of  environmental and Indigenous 
human rights defenders,  as well as  other civil society actors who support  people in 
marginalized and disadvantaged situations,  in realizing their Covenant rights .27 States Parties  
should take all measures  necessary  to ensure that environmental human rights defenders and 
journalists can carry out their work , without fear of harassment, intimidation or violence, 
including by protecting them from harm by third parties.28 International and domestic 
decision -making must also be governed by integrity safeguards, such as transparency, 
conflict -of-interest controls and anti -capture measures, so that outcomes are free from undue 
influence that may impair the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment . 
14. Where an activity is determined to pose a significant risk to the environment and 
thereby affect the enjoyment of Covenant rights, States Parties must conduct environmental 
and human rights impact assessments, as they form core components of procedural 
obligations.29 The assessment s should be conducted prior to the activity, be independent, 
consider cumulative impacts, and, in cases involving activities that may affect Indigenous 
Peoples’ territories, be carried out in a manner that respects their culture.30 Such assessments 
should  be conducted with meaningful public participation , and the results should  be made 
public and used to  inform measures to prevent, cease and remedy any human rights violations 
or abuses.  
15. Respecting, protecting and fulfilling Covenant rights  requires addressing the root 
causes of the interconnected crises of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution. These 
are driven by unsustainable patterns of production and consumption , and an economic model 
based  on unlimited growth. A  transition to an economy that is centred on human rights and 
the well -being of the planet is imperative to ensur e equal enjoyment of human rights within 
the Earth’s ecological limits.  
16. In particular, c limate change is already having a severe impact on the enjoyment of 
Covenant  rights , and is exacerbating other environmental challenges, requiring both systemic 
transformation and concrete policy measures . Under the Covenant, States Parties  are obliged 
to adopt and implement both mitigation and adaption measures to protect Covenant rights  
from the effects of climate change , and to provide reparation for the adverse impacts of 
climate change . These measures must reflect the highest possib le ambition to meet the global 
temperature goal, aiming to avoid the worst climate -related harms  and uphold human rights 
and sustainable development. In designing and implementing mitigation and adaptation 
measures, States Parties  must  ensure that these are disability -inclusive31 and address 
structural  discrimination or inequality, pay ing particular attention to the rights of individuals 
and groups in vulnerable situations.32 
17. To mitigate climate change, States Parties must take all available measures, based on 
the best available scientific evidence, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in line with the 
temperature goal set out in the Paris Agreement .33 If the current pace of fossil fuel production 
continues, global greenhouse gas  emissions are likely to exceed the level compatible with the 
Paris Agreement temperature goal , with far-reaching  implications for the realization of 
Covenant rights. Furthermore, States Parties should  phase down  the expansion of fossil fuel 
infrastructure , whether by public authorities or private actors,  and phase out inefficient fossil 
  
 26  J.T. et al. v.  Finland  (E/C.12/76/D/251/2022 -E/C.12/76/D/289/2022 ) para. 14.6; and general 
comment No. 24 (2017) , paras. 12 and 17.  
 27  General comments No. 15 (2002) , para. 59; and No. 18 (2005), para. 51. 
 28  General Assembly resolution 78/216, paras. 18, 21 and 27.  
 29  Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2010 , para. 204; 
and Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory opinion OC -23/17, para. 160. 
 30  J.T. et al. v. Finland , para. 14.6.  
 31  See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/hrbodies/crpd/statements/2024 -11-19-stm-
disability -Inclusion -Climate -Action.docx.  
 32  HRI/2019/1 , para. 13.  
 33  Paris Agreement, art. 2;  Glasgow Climate Pact, decision 1/CMA/3, para. 21; outcome of the first 
global stocktake, decision 1/CMA.5 (2023), para. 38; and International Court of Justice, Obligations 
of States in respect of Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , para. 224. 
E/C.12/GC/27  
6 GE.25 -15926  fuel subsidies that do not address energy poverty or just transitions.34 States Parties should 
make all efforts to promote renewable energy, phase down unabated coal power, and 
transition away from fossil fuels in energy systems, in a just , orderly  and equitable manner.35 
Developed States, i n line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities , should lead  mitigation efforts and provide  financi al and technolog ical 
assistance  to developing States to enable their effective climate action .36 Mitigation measures 
also include enhancing energy efficiency ; reducing waste generation through prevention, 
recycling and reuse; minimizing food waste ; transitioning towards sustainable food systems  
consistent with human rights;  and promoting the construction of  carbon -neutral  hous ing.37 
18. Forests, land , wetlands and marine ecosystems play a critical role in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, serving as natural sinks and reservoirs for greenhouse gases. States 
Parties must take all measures necessary to conserve, protect and restore these ecosystems, 
including by halting and reve rsing deforestation, land and forest degradation and marine 
pollution.38 In accordance with the precautionary principle, unproven climate -related 
technologies  should not be used until their environmental risks and potential impacts on 
Covenant rights are fully understood and assessed.39 
  Progressive realization  (art. 2 (1) ) 
19. Progressive realization  requires States Parties  to take deliberate , concrete and targeted 
steps towards the full realization of Covenant rights , moving as expeditiously and effectively 
as possible .40 To monitor and evaluate this progress, it is essential to i ncorporat e appropriate 
indicators and time -bound targets. States Parties must fully integrate sustainability when 
designing laws, policies and programmes to ensure  the realiz ation of  these rights  for present 
and future generations.  
20. Progress in realizing Covenant rights cannot be considered adequate if it fails to 
address  existing inequalities or exacerbates disparities  in their enjoyment. Progressive 
realization must be guided by the principle  of non -discrimination and equality, beginning 
with satisfaction of the minimum essential levels of each right.  States Parties  must improve 
the fulfilment of these rights for all, while prioritizing individuals and groups in marginalized 
or disadvantaged  situations , who are often most affecte d by environmental degradation  and 
posses s fewer resources to respond . 
21. The principle of progressive realization entails the prohibition of retrogression.41 It 
means that States Parties  must refrain from adopting any measures that would diminish the 
level of realization of Covenant rights. If a measure of retrogressive nature is proposed, it 
must be fully justified in the light of the totality of the Covenant rights and full use of the 
maximum available resources. Such measures  require the most careful consideration of 
whether they are temporary, necessary, proportionate and non -discriminatory, and of  the 
extent to which they affect the minimum core content of the rights con cerned.42 
22. Examples of retrogression may include a w eakening of environmental regulations that 
increase s health  risks , or reduc ing access to clean water  and sanitation .43 Failure to consider 
  
 34  E/C.12/NOR/CO/6 , para. 11; HRI/2019/1 , para. 12; and United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change decision 1/CMA.5, para. 28.  
 35  Pact for the Future, General Assembly resolution 79/1 , para. 28 (c).  
 36  Paris Agreement, art. 4 (4); International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of Climate 
Change, Advisory Opinion , paras. 247 and 248;  and Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory 
opinion  OC-32/25, paras. 328 –330. 
 37  A/HRC/56/46 , paras. 7–14. 
 38  General Assembly resolution 79/1 , para. 28 (e) ; and International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, 
advisory opinion on climate change and international law , pp. 151 and 152.  
 39  A/74/161 , para. 83; and Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,  
decision  X/33 (2010), para. 8 (w), and decision XIII/14 (2016), para. 6.  
 40 General comment No. 3 (1990), para. 9 . 
 41  General comment No. 3 (1990), para. 9.  
 42  E/C.12/2016/1 , para. 4; E/C.12/2007/1 , para. 10; and Ben Djazia and Bellili v. Spain 
(E/C.12/61/D/5/2015 ), para. 17.6.  
 43  Inter -American Court of Human Rights , Inhabitants of La Oroya v. Peru , judgment of 27 November 
2023, p aras. 186 and 187.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  7 the long-term impacts of environmental degradation  – such as climate change, biodiversity 
loss and pollution  – on future generations may also amount to impermissible retrogression.  
23. The full realization of Covenant rights  must occur within the planet’s ecological limits. 
Measures addressing excessive levels of production and consumption  – particularly where  
such patterns threaten  the long-term realization of rights – should not be considered 
retrogressive . Conversely , measures whereby a State sustains or promotes consumption 
patterns that  cause significant environmental harm , thereby  undermin ing the equitable 
realization of rights over time, may constitute retrogression . 
  Maximum available resources  (art. 2 (1) ) 
24. The term “resources ” in article 2  (1) of the Covenant  includes human, financial, 
technical, natural, cultural and scientific resources, whether from public, private, domestic or 
international sources.44 States Parties  must mobilize and allocate the maximum available 
resources for the progressive realization of Covenant rights, in a manner compatible with 
ecological limits  and the objectives of sustainable development . This includes  preventing 
harm from  environmental degradation, such as climate change, pollution and biodiversity 
loss, and ensuring that these rights are fully respected, protected and fulfilled throughout  the 
transition to a sustainable economy.  
25. States Parties should enhance resource availability by taking measures such as 
combating tax evasion, tax avoidance and corruption, and by strengthening progressive tax 
systems, while avoiding undue burdens on disadvantaged individuals and groups.45 Fiscal 
policies should be sustainable , support a just transition to low -carbon economies, and protect 
low-income households from increased costs during this transition . Broadly , fiscal policies 
should incentivize sustainable development models  and should be  shaped  through transparent 
and participatory process es. Addressing  economic and structural inequalities is essential for 
the full realization of Covenant rights and for advancing sustainable development.  Equitable 
access to land, natural resources and scientific research must also be guaran teed.  
26. Natural resources are integral to human well -being, and their sustainable use 
contributes to the realization of Covenant rights, through clean water, sanitation, air, food, 
and healthy ecosystems.46 States Parties must incorporate an ecosystem approach that 
promotes  the conservation, sustainable use and equitable sharing of natural resources, 
including access to land and water.47 These resources  must  be managed sustainably  for 
present and future generations, including through incentives for sustainable practices and 
through investment in climate adaptation.  The vital role of Indigenous Peoples and traditional 
communities in maintaining biodiversity and ecosyste ms must be also recognized, and their 
traditional livelihoods, cultural practices and world views should be respected  and, where 
compatible with human rights and sustainability,  supported.48 
 B. Core obligations  
27. In its g eneral comment No. 3 (1990) , the Committee affirms that States Parties  have 
a core obligation to ensure, at a minimum , essential levels of each right recognized in the 
Covenant. This remains applicable in situations of conflict, emergency or natural disaster.49 
In the context of environmental degradation and the transition to sustainable economies, this 
includes acces s to essential healthcare, basic shelter and housing, safe and sufficient water 
and sanitation, adequate and safe food, and education that meets minimum standards. This 
  
 44  General comments No. 3 (1990) , para. 13; and No. 24 (2017), para. 23.  
 45  See E/C.12/2025/1 . 
 46  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and Human Well -being: Synthesis  
(Washington,  D.C., Island Press, 2005).  
 47  General comment No. 26 (2022), para. 38; General Assembly resolution 73/284, para. 3; Convention 
on Biological Diversity, art. 2; and Conference of the Parties to the  Convention on Biological 
Diversity,  decision V/6 (2000) . 
 48  Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,  decision X/33 (2010),  
para. 8 (i) and (v).  
 49  E/C.12/2001/10 , para. 17.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
8 GE.25 -15926  obligation  also includes  guaranteeing access to essential public services and basic income 
security, including through social protection systems,50 and to just and favourable conditions 
of work, including occupational safety and minimum wages that ensure a decent living.51 
Cultural participation  and access to the benefits of scientific progress and its applications 
essential for the enjoyment of  human rights  must also be ensured.52 
28. Furthermore, States Parties  have a core obligation to safeguard the  environmental 
conditions necessary for realizing  essential levels of Covenant  rights in the short, medium 
and long term , includ ing protecting sources of water for domestic use, reducing pollutants 
and preserving critical ecosystems such as forests and wetlands. As a matter of priority, States 
Parties  must make every effort, using all available resources, to prevent  – and where 
prevention is not possible, to mitigate  – environmental harm  that threatens  the realization of  
essential levels of Covenant rights . Where harm occurs, States Parties must  ensure access to  
effective remed ies and reparations. Policies and measures to safeguard  these  fundamental 
environmental conditions must be designed in full  respect of Covenant rights, ensuring that 
they do not undermine the essential levels of their enjoyment . 
29. The Committee recalls that  a failure to meet minimum core obligations can only be 
justified by a demonstrated effort  to use all available resources to satisfy, as a matter of 
priority, those minimum obligations .53 States Parties should further ask the international 
community for assistance in implementing its core obligations. In particular, i t is incumbent 
upon States Parties  and other actors in a position to provide international assistance and 
cooperat ion to enable countries with fewer resources to fulfil their core obligations ,54 which  
is especially urgent in disaster and emergency situations.  
 C. International obligations  
  Extraterritorial obligations  
30. The Committee has previously affirmed the obligation of States Parties to respect and 
protect the enjoyment of Covenant rights beyond their borders ,55 consistently addressing 
these obligations during the examination of States Parties ’ periodic reports, particularly in 
relation to business activities. In the context of environmental degradation, it is incumbent 
upon States Parties to prevent foreseeable harm to the enjoyment of Covenant rights in other 
countries resulting from climate change, pollution or unsustainable development. This 
includes regulating activities under their effective control that c ontribute to such harm. These 
obligations are reinforced by a systematic  interpretation of the Covenant, consistent with 
international environmental law.56 The obligation  to prevent significant environmental harm 
to other States is a firmly established customary rule.57 It requires States to use all the means 
at their disposal “to avoid activities which take place in its territory, or in any area under its 
jurisdiction, causing significant damage to the environment of another State ”.58 Where 
transboundary  environmental harm occurs, States Parties  must mitigate and remedy the 
impact s on Covenant rights.  
31. States Parties  also have an extraterritorial obligation to prevent the activities of 
business enterprises under their jurisdiction from causing environmental harm that affects the 
enjoyment of Covenant rights in other countries.59 To this end, States Parties  are expected to  
adopt appropriate regulatory and policy measures to ensure that business en tities domiciled 
  
 50  E/C.12/2015/1 , para. 8.  
 51  General comment No. 23 (2016), para. 65.  
 52  General comments No. 21 (2009),  para. 55; and No. 25 (2020), para. 52.  
 53  General comment No. 3  (1990) , para. 10. 
 54  General comment No. 14 (2000) , para. 45.  
 55  General comments No. 15 (2002) , para. 31 ; No. 24 (2017) , paras. 26 –37; and No. 26 (2022) , 
paras.  40–47. 
 56  Sacchi et al. v. Argentina  (CRC/C/88/D/104/2019 ), para. 10.5. 
 57  International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , 
para. 272.  
 58  Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2010 , para. 101. 
 59  Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory opinion  OC-32/25, paras. 345–350. 
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  9 in their territory or under their jurisdiction respect human rights , including by conducting  
human rights and environmental due diligence throughout their  operation s and value chains. 
States Parties  are also expected to establish accessible judicial and non -judicial mechanisms 
to ensure accountability and provide remedies for human rights abuses by business 
enterprises  operating transnationally, particularly where effective remedies are unavail able 
or ineffective  in the State where the harm occurs.  
32. Where States Parties support or engage in investments abroad , particularly in 
large -scale projects , they should ensure  – including, where appropriate, by requiring  – that 
such investments are subject to effective human rights due diligence, and do not impair the 
ability of the receiving States to fulfil their obligations under the Covenant,60 including 
preventing and mitigating environmental degradation. States Parties  should take measures , 
including through appropriate regulatory and treaty frameworks, to reduce the risk of 
business enterprises under their jurisdiction misus ing investment treaties or investor -State 
dispute settlement mechanisms in ways that undermine environmental regulations  or 
Covenant rights in other States.61 States Parties  should also maintain adequate domestic 
policy space , including environmental regulations , for realizing the Covenant rights when 
pursuing business -related policy objectives with other States or business enterprises, for 
instance through investment treaties or contracts.  
  International assistance and cooperation (art. 2 (1))  
33. Responding to transboundary environmental challenges , such as climate change, 
pollution and biodiversity loss , which threaten  the enjoyment of Covenant rights , requires an 
effective g lobal response . States Parties  must take steps, individually and through 
international assistance and cooperation , to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and to 
address biodiversity loss and environmental degradation , in line with the objectives of 
sustainable development.  
34. In implementing their obligation of assistance and cooperation, States Parties  should 
consider  historical contribution s to environmental degradation , different capabilities,  and the  
specific needs of developing countries. The principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities  is essential  for a just and equitable transition from 
a fossil fuel -based economy.62 Priority areas of cooperation include climate finance, 
technology transfer, capacity -building, information -sharing, addressing loss and damage, and 
securing fair and durable solutions for climate -induced displacement and migration . 
Combating illicit financial flows, including tax evasion and avoidance, is critical to 
enhancing  States’ capacities  for environmental and climate action.  
35. Developed States should support developing States that have more limited capacities 
in achieving a just and equitable transition. This includes provi ding climate finance and 
transfer ring environmentally sound technologies to support mitigation , adaptation  and 
reparations , particular ly for countries least responsible but most affected .63 In line with the 
principle of equity, assistance to low -income countries with high debt burdens should be 
provided as grants rather than loans to avoid exacerbating debt distress.64 Where necessary 
to restore sustainability and protect Covenant rights, debt restructuring, relief or cancellation 
should be considered.  A just transition must reduce, not reinforce , inequalities both within 
and between countries.65 
36. Given the central role of science and technology in advancing sustainable 
development and responding to environmental crises, States Parties  must facilitate the 
transfer of, and access to, relevant technology and scientific research necessary to realize  
  
 60  General comment No. 26 (2022) , para. 44; and Inter -American Court of Human Rights , advisory 
opinion OC-32/25, para. 351. 
 61  See A/78/168 . 
 62  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , preamble and art. 3 (1); and Paris 
Agreement, art. 2 (2).  
 63  General comment No. 26 (2022) , para. 58; and Committee on the Rights of the Child, general 
comment No. 26 (2023), paras. 111 –115. 
 64  General Assembly resolution 79/1 , para. 28 ; and  A/HRC/55/54 , para. 53. 
 65  Sustainable Development Goal 10.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
10 GE.25 -15926  Covenant rights . Intellectual property regimes must not hinder access to such technology.66 
States Parties should recognize and support diverse knowledge systems, including the 
traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of Indigenous Peoples, peasants and other 
rural communities, which are essential to biodiversity conservation and climate  change 
mitigation and adaptation.67 
37. International assistance and cooperation should be grounded in equity, mutual  respect 
and accountability, and structured to avoid undermining the sustainable development of 
recipient countries.68 Financing for environmental and climate action should expand fiscal 
space to support mitigation , adaptation  and reparations , while reinforcing  social protection 
systems  that are vital to ensuring the minimum essential levels of enjoyment of Covenant 
rights . States Parties  receiving assistance are obliged to  use it effectively for the realization 
of Covenant rights, especially minimum core obligations, giving priority to people  in 
vulnerable situations.69 States Parties  and providers of international assistance must ensure 
that environmental measures supported through international cooperation are impl emented 
with the meaningful participation of affected individuals  and communities, and with the free, 
prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples.  
38. States Parties  should create an international environment conducive to the full 
realization  of Covenant rights , including in areas such as  trade, investment, taxation, finance, 
environmental protection, climate policy and development cooperation.70 States Parties  
should exercise their roles and responsibilities within the international financial architecture , 
including in international forums such as the I nternational Monetary Fund  and the World 
Bank, and in the negotiation and implementation of trade and investment treaties, to ensure 
that decisions in these spaces advance  the realization of Covenant rights .71 
 D.  Obligation of equality  and non -discrimination  (arts. 2 (2) and 3)  
  Equality and non -discrimination (art. 2 (2))  
39. While environmental degradation, including climate change, affect s everyone, 
systemic  inequalities, discrimination and historic al exclusion from decision -making 
processes have led to disproportionately severe impacts on certain individuals and gro ups, 
often exacerbating existing inequalities, based on factors such as socioeconomic status, race, 
colour, gender, disability, age, migratory status, sexual orientation and gender identity.  
Individuals and groups in vulnerable situations , particularly those wh o experience 
intersecting forms of disadvantage , face disproportionate harm and possess fewer resources 
to respond.72 States Parties  must  identify and prioritize the needs of individuals and groups 
in vulnerable or marginalized situations, taking into account intersectionality. They must 
address structural and systemic discrimination and inequality, and safeguard such individuals 
and communities from human rights risks arising both from  environmental harm and from 
measures taken in response .73 In doing so, States Parties must also take into account the rights 
of future generations to equal enjoyment of all human rights , and refrain from acts or 
omissions  likely to result in or perpetuate discrimination against them.74 
40. Heavily polluting and hazardous facilities – including open -pit mines, smelters, 
petroleum refineries, chemical plants, coal -fired power stations, oil and gas fields, steel plants, 
waste dumps and hazardous waste incinerators – are often located in or near disadvantaged 
  
 66  E/C.12/2018/1 , para. 7; and general comment No. 25 (2020), paras. 62, 79 and 80.  
 67  Convention on Biological Diversity, art. 8 (j).  
 68  Maastricht Principles on Extraterritorial Obligations of States in the Area of Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights,  principle 32.  
 69  Ibid., principle 34.  
 70  Ibid., principle 29.  
 71  E/C.12/2016/1 , paras. 7–9. 
 72  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Summary for policymakers, in Climate Change 2023: 
Synthesis Report, Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ; and A/79/270 , para. 88.  
 73  E/C.12/2019/1 , paras. 6–10. 
 74  Maastricht Principles on the Human Rights of Future Generations, principle 6.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  11 and marginalized communities.75 The principle of non -discrimination and equality requires 
States Parties to address systemic patterns of marginalization and environmental injustices, 
particularly those linked to intersecting forms of discrimination, including racism and 
colonial legacie s.76 This includes prioritizing  mitigation, adaptation, remediation, reparation 
and environmental restoration measures for communities that bear a disproportionate burden 
of exposure to pollution and toxic contamination.77 
41. States Parties  must ensure equal access to natural resources for  Indigenous Peoples, 
peasants and people in rural communities who depend on nature for subsistence and their 
cultural identity. States Parties  must also prevent and address harmful practices  by private 
actors , such as pollution -intensive operations or  carbon -offset projects, that 
disproportionately affect individuals and groups in  marginalized situations . 
  Equal rights of men and women (art. 3)  
42. Achieving e quality between men and women in the enjoyment of Covenant rights  in 
all policy areas is a precondition  for sustainable development. Women and girls often face 
legal, social and economic disadvantages rooted in unequal power relations and patriarchal 
structures. The environmental crises exacerbate existing  gender inequalities, particularly in 
access to land, natural resources, and essential services, including healthcare, food, water, 
sanitation and waste treatment.78 
43. Women and girls are disproportionately exposed to harmful effects from toxic 
substances, waste and pollution, with serious implications for their health and well -being.79 
For women  in rural areas, secure access to land is a critical resource for subsistence, access 
to essential goods and services, and protection from  violence.80 In addressing environmental 
crises and fulfilling their obligation to ensure substantive equality, States Parties  must 
guarantee women ’s access to, control over and secure  tenure of land and other means 
necessary for food security and livelihoods.81 
44. Gender inequality is compounded by the unequal burden of unpaid care and domestic 
work on women, and is intensified by climate change  – for example , the increased time and 
effort required to secure water , or altering work patterns due to rising temperatures.82 States  
Parties  should recognize, reduce and redistribute unpaid care and support work , by ensuring 
accessible, rights -based  care and support systems, and by promoting an equitable sharing of 
responsibilities between men and women,  and among the State, families, communities  and 
the private sector .83 
45. States Parties  should integrate a gender -responsive and whole -of-government 
approach into all sustainable development policies, especially relat ing to disaster risk 
reduction, climate change, pollution, biodiversity protection and natural resource 
management.84 This includes gender -responsive financing a nd budgeting  strategies . In the 
context of natural disasters and climate -related emergencies, States Parties must ensure that 
women have equal access to resources and means of protection, including timely  warnings 
and other relevant information. States Parties also have a duty to ensure that  women have 
access  to accurate,  affordable and culturally appropriate environmental information and 
education .85 These efforts should be informed by impact assessments that examine the 
differentiated effects of climate change and environmental degradation on women and girls.  
  
 75  A/HRC/49/53 , para. 28.  
 76  A/77/549 , para. 77.  
 77  A/HRC/49/53 , para. 57. 
 78  E/2022/27 , chap. I, sect. A, para. 46.  
 79  A/HRC/52/33 , paras. 15, 18, 29 and 33.  
 80  General comment No. 26 (2022), para. 14.  
 81  General comment No. 16 (2005), para. 28.  
 82  E/2022/27 , chap. I, sect. A, paras. 23, 38, 47 and 62 (jj); and A/HRC/41/26 , para. 8. 
 83  A/HRC/58/43 , para. 72 (a).  
 84  Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general recommendation No. 37 
(2018), para. 26; and A/HRC/41/26 . 
 85  A/HRC/52/33 , para. 66. 
E/C.12/GC/27  
12 GE.25 -15926   IV. Obligations of States Parties in relation to specific rights  
  Right to self -determination (art. 1) and right to freely utilize natural resources 
(art. 25) 
46. Article s 1 (2) and 25 of the Covenant affirm the right of peoples to freely pursue their 
economic, social and cultural development and dispose of their natural wealth and resources , 
as an essential aspect of their self -determination . This right entails that people s are the 
primary beneficiar ies of exploitation of their natural resource s. Each State Party must ensure 
that such exploitation, whether by national or foreign entities, is adequately regulated, so that 
the benefits are fairly and equitably sha red in ways that advance Covenant rights .86 In 
pursuing equitable and sustainable development, each State Party retains policy space best 
suited to its particular context, to determine  the most appropriate mix of economic and social 
measures, provided that these are consistent with its obligations under the Covenant . Taxation, 
subsidies and licensing regimes related to resource extraction should be  designed to mobilize 
resources effectively for the realization of Covenant rights , while minimizing environmental 
harm .87 Contracts with business entities  for the extraction  of natural resources should avoid  
the privatiz ation of  natural wealth and ensure the fair and equitable sharing of benefits , in 
accordance with article 1 of the Covenant.  
47. States Parties must uphold  procedural safeguards  in all decision -making related to the 
exploitation of natural resources, including ensuring meaningful public participation, access 
to timely and comprehensible information , and adherence to human rights principles 
throughout the licensing and concession processes .88 Where  Indigenous Peoples are affected, 
their right to free, prior and informed consent must be fully respected and protected.89 The 
issuance of licences or permits must be preceded by independent and participatory 
environmental and human rights impact assessments, aimed at identifying potential harm to 
Covenant rights and local ecosystems.90 These assessments should inform decision -making 
and be accompanied by effective mechanisms for redress, particularly for affected 
communities , peasants and Indigenous Peoples.91 
48. States Parties must  exercise their right to dispose of natural resources in accordance 
with the principle s of sustainab ility, intergenerational equity, and the prohibition of 
transboundary environmental harm.92 Overexploitation undermines  the enjoyment of 
Covenant rights,  which  depend on a healthy environment. Whe re communities are directly 
affecte d by extractive activities , States Parties should ensure mitigation , fair compensation , 
and accountability, including  requiring polluters, including business entities, to cover the 
costs of harm and environmental rehabilitation .93 
  Right to work (art. 6)  
49. Changes in environmental conditions pose growing risks to employment and income, 
especially in climate -sensitive sectors such as agriculture and fisheries. While the transition 
to environmentally sustainable economies can generate new decent work opportunities, it 
may also result in job losses in fossil fuel -reliant sectors.94 States Parties should assess, in a 
participatory manner, the impacts of both environmental degradation and policy responses 
on employment opportunities  across all sectors, in line with their human rights obligations.  
50. On the basis of such assessments, States Parties should formulate and implement 
policies to expand decent work opportunities during the transition to sustainable econom ies, 
  
 86  E/C.12/COD/CO/4 , para. 13; E/C.12/MRT/CO/1 , para. 8; and E/C.12/1/Add.33 , para. 10.  
 87  E/C.12/CMR/CO/4 , para. 15;  and E/C.12/FIN/CO/6 , para. 9 (c).  
 88  General comment No. 25 (2020), paras. 53–56. 
 89  General comment No. 26 (2022), paras. 15, 21 and 58; and J.T. et al. v. Finland , para. 14.6.  
 90  E/C.12/KAZ/CO/2 , para. 17 (e).  
 91  General comment No. 24 (2017) , paras. 17, 18 and 32; and United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas, art. 5 (2).  
 92  Rio Declaration, principles 2 and 3.  
 93  Rio Declaration, principle 16 ; and E/C.12/MLI/CO/1 , para. 44. 
 94  ILO, Guidelines for a just transition toward s environmentally sustainable economies and societies for 
all, para. 12 (d).  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  13 paying particular attention to young people, women, and persons in vulnerable or 
marginalized situations.95 Measures should ensure that w orkers in transition -affected sectors 
have access to vocational training, career guidance, reskilling and other support to facilitate 
their transition to green jobs. Employment generation  should also be promoted , including by 
expanding public services and through ecosystem restoration initiatives .96 States Parties 
should recognize and support workers in the informal economy contribut ing to climate 
resilience and a circular economy, and take measures to facilitate their  transition to formal 
employment.  
  Right to just and favourable conditions of work (art. 7)  
51. Rapid environmental changes increase risks to working conditions and exacerbate 
existing ones , particularly through  extreme weather and rising temperatures which  endanger 
workers’ health and safety. States Parties should  assess these risks across all sectors and adopt  
preventi ve and protecti ve measures to ensure just and favourable conditions of work, 
including in the informal economy. This includes addressing both physical and mental health 
impacts , ensuring access to support services , safeguarding  working conditions in emerging 
green sectors such as renewable energy and the circular economy, and ecosystem restoration.  
52. States Parties should monitor and regulate  workplaces  effectively in order to address  
climate -related health and safety risks, including through robust  labour inspection s ystems, 
and should unde rtake these efforts  in meaningful dialogue with workers and their 
representatives . Regulatory framework s should require business entities to protect workers ’ 
health and safety,97 and to integrate decent and productive work into their climate and 
environmental strategies and due diligence.98 Policies should include safeguards and be 
align ed with internationally recognized standards, such as the core labour standards of the 
International Labour Organization and relevant frameworks for responsible business conduct 
and investment.  
  Right to form and join trade unions (art. 8)  
53. Trade unions and their collective actions play an important role in advocating for just 
and favourable  conditions of work and protecting workers from the impacts of  environmental 
change and related  measures. States Parties must ensure that trade unions and workers ’ 
councils are able to meaningfully participate – through social dialogue and other mechanisms 
– in assessing risks to working conditions, and in designing policies to address them at the 
national, sectoral and workplace levels.  
54. Collective bargaining can be an effective mechanism for integrating environmental 
and climate -related concerns into workplace agreements , including provisions that ensure 
workers’ access to relevant environmental information, the right to refuse work that poses 
serious environmental risks or violates environmental legislation, protection for 
whistle -blowers reporting environmental harm, occupational safety and health, sustainable 
transportation benefits, training on just transition, protection during cl imate -related disasters, 
and support for green procurement practices.  
  Right to social security (art. 9)  
55. Access to social security, healthcare and social services is essential for reducing 
vulnerability and inequality and  enhancing people ’s resilience to environmental risks. States  
Parties  must  ensure that social protection  systems are adequately prepared to address the 
impacts of extreme weather , climate -related disasters and forced displacement. This includes 
incorporating climate and environmental risks, alongside life -cycle risks, into social 
protection systems, and linking these systems to vulnerabili ty assessments.99 Effective 
preparedness and support requires the early identification  of individuals and groups need ing 
support , such as older persons,  persons with disabilities , or those facing  livelihood loss, to 
  
 95  ILO, ILC.111/Resolution V , para. 21 (g).  
 96  ILO, Guidelines for a just transition, para. 29 (f).  
 97  Ibid., para. 26 (j).  
 98  ILO, Greening Enterprises: Transforming Processes and Workplaces . 
 99  ILO, World Social Protection Report 2024 –26, p. 76.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
14 GE.25 -15926  enable them to prepare for, cope with and recover from climate -related shocks . Social 
protection should  be made to serve as a bridge between immediate humanitarian responses 
and long -term sustainable development.100 
56. A well -designed social protection system plays a vital role in protecting individuals 
from the adverse effects of environmental policies and in facilitating the transition to green 
jobs and sustainable livelihoods. As a core obligation under the Covenant, States Parties must 
guarantee  universal access to essential levels of social protection, including access to 
essential healthcare, and basic income security for children , for persons of working age 
unable to earn sufficient income  for reasons such as s ickness, unemployment, maternity or 
disability , and for older persons.101 Such protection must be sufficient to enable individuals 
and families to meet their basic needs, including adequate  housing, water and sanitation, food, 
education, and, where relevant, disability -related costs . Furthermore, States Parties should 
take deliberate and targeted steps to progressively realize the right to social security, paying 
particular attention to those who remain unprotected, including women, workers in 
precarious employment relationships, and  those in the informal economy.  
57. States Parties must ensure that social security systems are adequately funded, resilient  
to future  shocks , and designed to meet  long-term needs, using the maximum available 
resources . Where national resources and capacity are insufficient to ensure sustainable social 
protection  systems, States Parties  must seek international assistance  and cooperation . 
  Right to an adequate standard of living (art. 11)  
58. The right to an adequate standard of living requires States Parties to ensure that 
everyone has access to the goods and services necessary for an adequate standard of living, 
including adequate food, water and sanitation, clothing, housing, electricity, transport and 
communications.102 The reference in article 11 of the Covenant to “the continuous 
improvement of living conditions ” must be understood in the light of the planet’s 
environmental limits. States Parties should promote transitions in areas such as food, water, 
housing and transport systems to ensure sustainability and resilience to environmental change . 
59. The right to adequate food requires long-term access to sufficient, nutritious and 
culturally appropriate food through  the sustainable use of  natural resources, such as soil, 
water, seeds, biodiversity, agriculture and forests , particularly  in rural areas and increasingly 
in urban settings. States Parties  must promote  a transformation of food systems consistent 
with human rights obligations  – ensuring  the long -term viability  of production and 
distribution , increas ing resilience to climate change, reduc ing pollution , and safeguarding  
biodiversity  through its conservation and sustainable use .103 
60. Article 11  (2) (a) of the Covenant requires States Parties to develop and reform 
agrarian systems  “in such a way as to achieve the most efficient development and utilization 
of natural resources ”. Efficien cy must be understood to include sustainability  – preserving 
the long -term capacity of natural resources  – to support the enjoyment of Covenant rights. 
This includes measures to respect, protect and fulfil tenure security for all legitimate tenure 
rights to land, fisheries and forests , especially  for individuals, communities and peoples in 
vulnerable or marginalized situations .104 Transitioning to sustainable food systems require s 
planning  consistent with the right to  adequate food,  including spatial planning  that prioritizes  
individuals and groups in disadvantaged or marginalized situations,  such as small -scale 
farmers.105 Current agricultural policies and subsidies that support unsustainable land use and 
  
 100  Ibid., p . 31. 
 101  General comment No. 19 (2007), para. 59 (a); and E/C.12/2015/1 , paras. 7–9. 
 102  General comments No. 4 (1991); No. 12 (1999); and No. 15 (2002).  
 103  Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Voluntary guidelines to support the progressive 
realization of the right to adequate food in the context of national food security : 
guideline 8E . 
 104  General comment No. 26 (2022) , paras. 22 –33. 
 105  United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas , 
preamble and para. 7.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  15 deplete natural resources must be transformed to enable  food systems that ensure  an adequate 
standard of living for present and future generations.  
61. Industrial food system s – including production, transportation, processing, packaging, 
storage, retail, consumption and waste  – can significantly contribute to climate change , 
biodiversity loss and the degradation of soil and water .106 Securing the right to food entails 
promoting  sustainable farming  practices, including, where appropriate, the adoption of 
agroecological approaches, to reduce carbon emissions, antibiotic overuse, and reliance on 
intensive industrial models. These practices also help prevent zoonotic diseases  and crop 
diseases  by enhancing biodiversity and reducing harmful practices such as large -scale 
monoculture and excessive pesticide  use. 
62. Limited  access to safe water and sanitation is closely linked to poverty and inequality , 
and is exacerbated by water pollution, water scarcity, freshwater ecosystem  degradation, and 
climate change .107 States Parties must prioritize water for personal , domestic use, and 
small -scale subsistence agriculture , and, as part of their core obligations, ensure universal 
access to safe and sufficient water  and adequate sanitation, especially for those living in  
low-income households and other disadvantaged or marginalized situations.108 
63. To that end, States Parties  should adopt integrated strategies to ensure the right to 
water for present and future generations ,109 includ ing effective measures to prevent water 
pollution, to reduce unsustainable or inefficient use and  to address distribution losses. States 
Parties are also required to enact and enforce regulatory frameworks to prevent businesses 
and other actors from polluting, overextracting from or degrading freshwater ecosystems. 
Water and sanitation infrastructure must be  designed, built and maintained to be resilient to 
the impacts of extreme weather and natural disasters.110 
64. As a significant share of the world ’s freshwater resources lie in transboundary aquifers 
and river basins, the effective realization of the right to water and sanitation requires 
international cooperation ,111 includ ing regarding  water quality, equitable distribution, flood 
management, climate change adaptation , and sustainable  manage ment of  shared water 
resources.  
65. States Parties  must take timely adaptation measures to ensure that housing is resilient 
to climate impacts, such as  insulation, efficient heating, and cooling. States Parties must also 
adopt mitigation measures to reduce housing -related emissions, such as promoting 
sustainable materials, enhancing energy efficiency, and supporting the use of renewable 
energy for cooking, heating, cooling and lighting.112 Adaptation and mitigation measures 
must not undermine the right to adequate housing, especially for re sidents of informal 
settlements and persons in disadvantaged or marginalized situations, by increasing housing 
costs, energy poverty  or homelessness, or reinforcing pre-existing inequalities.  
66. Adequate u rban and rural planning at the national and local levels should address 
climate change  risks , disaster preparedness, pollution, access to water and waste management, 
affordable public transport, healthcare, social services, and income -generating 
opportunities.113 Planning should also incorporate net -zero building codes, green spaces, and 
measures to mitigate urban heat islands. Construction standards must promote  climate 
resilience and reduce emissions.  
  
 106  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report  
(2019), p. 439.  
 107  A/HRC/46/28 , para. 31; and UN-Water  and UNESCO , United Nations World Water Development 
Report 2020: Water and Climate Change , p. 2. 
 108  General comment No. 15 (2002) , para. 37.  
 109  Ibid., para. 28. 
 110  A/HRC/46/28 , para. 73. 
 111  UN-Water and UNESCO, United Nations World Water Development Report 2024: Water for 
Prosperity and Peace , p. 7.  
 112  A/HRC/52/28 , para. 70.  
 113  Sustainable Development Goal 11.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
16 GE.25 -15926    Right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health (art. 12)  
67. The right to health requires States Parties to ensur e access to timely, acceptable and 
affordable quality healthcare , and to provid e for the underlying determinants of health .114 
Laws and policies must  prevent  and reduc e air, water and soil pollution, including 
contamination  by heavy metals.115 
68. Environmental degradation , climate change and biodiversity loss  pose serious  health  
risks , with disproportionate and inequitable impacts both within and between States. States 
Parties should take spe cific measures to protect and fulfil the right to health for those most 
affected by environmental harm s. International assistance and cooperation are essential to 
addressing  transboundary health risks linked to environmental degradation . 
69. Health policies and programmes must address both the  physical and the mental health 
impacts of environmental degradat ion, including by building accessible, sustainable and 
resilient health systems . Attention should also be given to ensuring culturally appropriate 
healthcare services  for all, including Indigenous Peoples , and to protectin g practices and 
resources for traditional medicine . Intersectoral collaboration is vital to address ing the 
interrelated nature of human, animal  and environmental health,  and to promot ing planetary 
health, on which human health ultimately depends. The meaningful participation of civil 
society  organizations  and representatives of disadvantaged or marginalized groups  should be 
ensured  throughout all  stages  of health planning to promote  more inclusive outcomes.  
70. Health policymaking and resource allocation must account for long-term health 
challenges arising from environmental crises. States Parties  must design, implement and 
maintain health systems and services that are resilient to environmental shocks  and their 
associated economic and social impacts . Sustainable public investment is essential, both in  
the underlying determinants of health a nd in strengthening of the health system  itself , 
including  through the training , recruitment  and retention of a  sufficien t number of healthcare 
workers , and the protection of their labour rights.  
  Right to education (arts. 13 and 14)  
71. Access to education, infrastructure , and learning  outcomes are increasingly  affected 
by environmental degradation . Extreme weather, sea -level rise, floods, excessive heat or cold, 
water  scarcity and displacement significantly affect  schooling, students’ well-being and the 
quality and continuity  of education . These challenges  require adaptation  consistent with 
human rights obligations , including climate -resilient infrastructure, inclusive planning and 
disaster preparedness. States Parties  should guarante e continuous quality education for 
displaced children, including those in informal settle ments, and ensure that school facilities 
are safe, physically accessible, and adequate, with secure access routes and reliable water and 
sanitation.  
72. Education on sustainable development, human rights and environmental protection is 
an essential component of quality education and lifelong learning. States Parties should 
integrate environmental and climate education, including biodiversity protection,  at all levels 
of education , linking it to  human rights and environmental justice. Environmental values 
should be embedded  in curricula, teacher training , pedagogy and school environments.  
Learners of all ages should be able to  acquire the knowledge, skil ls and agency to address  
global challenges, and to take informed  action to safeguard the environment and promote 
sustainability . 
  Right to take part in cultural life and to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress 
(art. 15) 
73. Culture shapes and reflects how individuals and communities  relate to nature  and 
conduct  their economic, social and political lives .116 Cultural rights re quire States Parties to 
respect, protect and promote diverse cultural expressions, practices and knowledge  systems . 
  
 114  General comment No. 14 (2000) , paras. 4 , 11 and 12 . 
 115  Ibid., paras. 36 and 51.  
 116  General comment No. 21 (2009), paras. 13 and 36.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  17 The disconnection of people from nature and the domination of certain groups of people over 
nature and other groups of people  are among  the underlying causes of biodiversity loss and 
related environmental degradation.117 Therefore, cultural rights are crucial to sustainable 
development. Indigenous Peoples, peasants and local communities have often developed 
cultural practices and knowledge systems that support both human and ecological  
well-being.118 States Parties must  integrate cultural rights into development strategies and 
promote intercultural dialogue and knowledge -sharing  to address the root causes and impacts  
of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.  
74. Cultural heritage is increasingly threatened by climate change. Flood s, sea-level rise, 
coastal erosion, wildfires and extreme weather damage  both tangible and intangible heritage. 
The sustainable enjoyment of cultural rights requires States Parties  to consider long -term 
needs when providing support to artists, cultural institutions and scientific bodies. Individuals 
and communities should be supported in safeguarding cultural sites, traditions and practices 
in response to environmental chang e. 
75. The right to science entails access to scientific education and knowledge, fair sharing 
of the benefits of scientific progress, and the obligation to promote research that address es 
priority needs , especially for people in  vulnerable and marginalized  situations .119 Given the 
critical role of science and technology in addressing  environmental  crises and supporting  
sustainable transformation in the patterns of production and consumption , States Parties must 
adopt evidence -based environmental policies , ensure public access to environmental 
information , safeguard against disinformation, particularly on climate change,  and promote 
equitable access to the benefits of scientific progress.120 In line with the precautionary 
principle, States Parties must  regulate the use of unproven climate -related technologies.  
International cooperation is essential for fair sharing of scientific knowledge and transfer of 
environmentally sound technologies.  
 V.  Individuals and groups in particularly vulnerable situations  
76. Environmental degradation, including climate change, intensifies the vulnerabilities 
of individuals and groups who have historically experienced and/or experience 
marginalization. These vulnerabilities  are shaped by intersecting factors such as 
socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity, gender, disability, age, migratory status, sexual 
orientation and gender identity.121 The impacts of environmental harm vary within and 
between groups, depending on the context. Risks are particularly acute for those subject to 
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, which compound the consequences of 
environmental harm and further constrain  access to remedies, resources and 
resilience -building measures.  
77. States Parties must  identify those most at risk , address structural inequalities that 
heighten their exposure to environmental harm, and protect against human rights risks arising 
both from environmental degradation and from measures taken in response. Ensuring the 
meaningful participation of affected i ndividuals and groups throughout all stages of the 
decision -making is essential. While the adverse effects of environmental degradation can 
affect many, the present section is focused on children, on Indi genous Peoples, peasants, 
pastoralists and fishe rs whose livelihoods and cultures are closely connected to nature, and 
on displaced persons.  
  Children  
78. Climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution significantly affect children ’s rights 
and well -being. Y ounger children are especially  susceptible to environmental harm from 
pollution  and toxic chemical s, which can have long -term impacts on their health and 
  
 117  IPBES/11/12/Add.2, p. 5.  
 118  A/77/290 , paras. 32 and 33.  
 119  General comment No. 25 (2020), para. 52.  
 120  A/79/176 , para. 52.  
 121  A/79/270 , para. 88. 
E/C.12/GC/27  
18 GE.25 -15926  development.122 Food and water insecurity, intensified by environmental degradation, 
heightens the risks of acute and chronic maln utrition and disease .123 The loss of family 
livelihoods, especially in the informal sectors,  can increase the incidence of child labour and 
deepen poverty , and environmental stressors and c limate -related disasters  may disrupt 
education, increase  school dropout  rates, affect mental health, and heighten exposure to 
violence , exploitation and child marriage.124 Children in vulnerable situations, including 
those living in poverty, displacement, or social exclusion, are often disproportionately 
affected. The Committee also recognizes that children around the world are at the forefront 
of environmental ac tion, drawing attention to the human rights consequences of 
environmental degradation.125 
79. States Parties must adopt environmental measures that are child -sensitive, in the best 
interests  of the child ,126 and grounded  in science  and international standards. Children must 
be adequately protected from toxic substances, pollution and other environmental harms, in 
line with their right to the highest attainable standard of health. Long-term risk assessments 
must consider the specific impacts of environmental degradation on children. Children ’s right 
to be heard and to participate  must be respected throughout all relevant processes . States 
Parties should also recognize and protect child rights defenders, and establish safe and 
effective mechanisms for their participation in environmental and climate action.127 
  Indigenous Peoples  
80. Indigenous Peoples are among the most affected by c limate change, deforestation , 
pollution and biodiversity loss , particularly in relation to their livelihoods, health and cultural 
identity . Environmental harm can result in the loss of both tangible and intangible cultural 
heritage, leading to a profound erosion of identity, traditional knowledge, cultural practices, 
and connection to ancestral homelands.128 
81. The deep  relationship between  Indigenous Peoples and their ancestral lands forms the 
foundation of their cultural, spiritual and social identity, and provides for  their basic needs 
and livelihoods. Through this relationship, they have developed, in many contexts, systems 
of knowledge, governance and stewardship that promote living in harmony with nature and 
contribute to conserving biodiversity and ecosystems. These  contributions are essential to the 
realization of sustainable development and environmen tal protection.  
82. States Parties must recognize the inalienab le rights of Indigenous Peoples to their 
ancestral  lands and territories and their natural resources, and must fully respect their right to 
free, prior and informed consent in all matters affecting their rights.129 As part of their human 
rights due diligence, States Parties must ensure that environmental measures – including 
those related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and biodiversity offsets – do not 
result in land -, forest - or water -grabbing in I ndigenous territories or otherwise undermine 
Indigenous Peoples ’ rights.  
  Peasants, pastoralists, fishers and other people living in rural areas  
83. Peasants, pastoralists and other people living in rural areas , includ ing small -scale 
farmers and fishers , are severely affected by  climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss . 
These environmental crises al ter water  availability, vegetation patterns  and seasonal cycles , 
drive  sea-level rise, desertification  and land-use change , and disrupt agriculture, fishing and 
  
 122  Committee on the Rights of the Child, general comment No. 26 (2023) , paras. 38 –41; and 
HRI/2019/1 , para. 3.  
 123  A/HRC/46/28 , para. 44. 
 124  Committee on the Rights of the Child, general comment No. 26 (2023) , para. 35. 
 125  The present general comment has benefited from the lived experiences and meaningful contributions 
of children, gathered through five regional workshops held as part of the consultation process.  
 126  Committee on the Rights of the Child, general comment No. 26 (2023) , para. 16.  
 127  Inter -American Commission  on Human Rights, resolution No. 3/2021, para. 29.  
 128  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report, Contribution 
of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change , p. 51 . 
 129  J.T. et al. v. Finland , para. 14.6.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
GE.25 -15926  19 traditional livelihoods . Extreme weather events  and environmental degradation  reduce 
biodiversity, undermine traditional  seed and breeding systems , and deplete aquatic resources 
through warming and pollution. Together, these impacts threaten rural communities ’ right to 
food, to an adequate standard of living  and to their  cultural identity.  States Parties must 
protect them from these adverse impacts.  
84. Recognizing the crucial contribution of peasants, pastoralists and other people in rural 
areas to the sustainable use and management of natural resources and ecosystems,  States 
Parties must protect and promote their traditional knowledge, innovations and practices ,130 
and ensure the ir rights to secure tenure of and equitable access to land and other natural 
resources critical for their livelihoods.131 States Parties must also guarantee  their meaningful 
participation in the design, implementation and monitoring of environmental measures.  
85. Special measures are required for the most marginalized  in rural areas, such as  
landless peasants , agricultural labourers, fisher folk and rural women, who often face  
systemic discriminat ion in accessing  land and other  natural  resources, including water, seeds, 
forests and aquatic ecosystems .132 Pastoralism remains a sustainab le livelihood that can 
support  biodiversity and fragile d ryland and high -altitude  ecosystems,  but is  increasingly  
affected by chang ing vegetation zones, heat and drought. Adaptation policies  must include 
support for pastoralist communities . States Parties  must also respect and , as far as possible,  
protect  the customary rights of fishing communities  to seas, rivers, lakes  and aquatic 
resources , while  promot ing alternative income -generating opportunities.133 
  Persons displaced in the context of climate change and natural disasters  
86. States Parties must prevent climate -induced displacement, by strengthening 
mitigation, adaptation  and disaster risk reduction measures. Where relocation or resettlement  
is unavoidable to protect life and health, it must be treated as a last resort , and be carried out 
in full accordance with international human rights standards and through meaningful 
consultation with affected communities.134 Displaced persons must have  equal access to 
Covenant rights, including food, water and sanitation, housing, healthc are, education, 
livelihoods and cultural life. The minimum core obligations under the Covenant apply 
equally to displaced persons. For those displaced across borders due to climate change, States 
Parties must uphold the principle of non -refoulement and pro vide legal protection.135 In line 
with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, States Parties must 
cooperate internationally to mobilize resources  for supporting displaced persons, including 
through climate -related loss and damage mechanisms.136 
 VI. Remedies and accountability  
87. Respecting, protecting and fulfilling Covenant rights requires States Parties to prevent, 
mitigate and redress harm resulting from climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss. A 
State’s failure to take appropriate action to protect the climate system from greenhouse gas 
emissions may constitute an internationally wrongful act attributable to the State.137 Where 
Covenant rights are violated due to environmental degradation, States Parties must ensure 
access to timely, affordable and effective judicial and non -judicial remedies ,138 providing  
  
 130  General comment No. 25 (2020) , para . 39. 
 131  General comment No. 26, paras. 18 and 19; and United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants 
and Other People Working in Rural Areas , arts. 17 and 19.  
 132  United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas , 
art. 17. 
 133  FAO, Voluntary guidelines for securing sustainable small -scale fisheries in the context of food 
security and poverty eradication , para. 7.10. 
 134  A/HRC/56/47 , paras. 13 –15; and A/79/317 , para. 87 (b).  
 135  A/HRC/53/34 , paras. 68 and 69;  and Teitiota v. New Zealand  (CCPR/C/127/D/2728/2016 ), 
para.  9.11.  
 136  A/HRC/56/47 , para. 35.  
 137  International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , 
para. 427.  
 138  General comment No. 24, para. 41.  
E/C.12/GC/27  
20 GE.25 -15926  victims with access to reparation, including restitution, compensation, rehabilitation, 
satisfaction and guarantees of non -repetition.139 States Parties should also enable collective 
legal standing and access to justice , where appropriate, including  for those who act in the 
interests of future generations – such as youth representatives, guardians ad litem , and public 
interest organizations – and adopt flexible criteria for evidentiary rules to avoid  procedural 
barriers for victims .140 
88. States Parties  are also obliged to  prevent and redress infringe ments of  Covenant rights  
resulting from environmental harm caused by business entities and other non -State actors 
subject to their jurisdiction or control , including those operating abroad.141 States Parties , 
particularly  the home States of th e actors  responsible,  must take appropriate measures to 
ensure access to effective redress mechanisms  for victims of transboundary harm , especiall y 
where such remedies are un available or ineffective  in the States where the harm occurs.  
89. States Parties must cooperate in good faith to address adverse impacts of 
environmental degradation, including economic and non -economic loss and damage , as part 
of their obligation to ensure reparation for harm caused . This includes contributing  adequate 
resources for mechanisms such as the climate -related loss and damage fund, and ensuring 
that affected individuals and communities have equitable access to effective remedies and 
redress.  
90. States Parties must also ensure that accountability, monitoring and inv estigat ion 
mechanisms are effective in preventing and addressing any unintended adverse effects of 
laws and policies related to  climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution , particularly for 
individuals or groups in disadvantaged or marginalized situations . National human rights 
institutions, ombudspersons and similar bodies  should be empowered to address violations 
of Covenant rights and oversee  compliance  in this area . Monitorin g processes should be 
inclusive and participatory , and  supported by qualitative  insights  and disaggregated 
quantitative data.  
    
  
 139  Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross 
Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian 
Law; A/77/226 , para. 26; and International Court of Justice, Obligations of States in respect of 
Climate Change, Advisory Opinion , paras. 445 and 456.  
 140  Inter -American Court of Human Rights, advisory opinion OC-32/25, para. 554. 
 141  The Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights require access to effective remedies for 
human rights abuses by business entities , including  for abuses linked to environmental harms. See 
A/HRC/17/31 , annex, paras. 25 –31. 
