 
  
  
 
 
                                                CESCR General Comment No. 14:  The Right to the Highest Attainable 
Standard of Health (Art. 12) 
Adopted at the Twenty-second Session of the Committee on Economic,  
Social and Cultural Rights, on 11 August 2000 
(Contained in Document E/C.12/2000/4) 
 
1. Health is a fundamental human right indispensable for the exercise of other 
human rights.  Every human being is en titled to the enjoyment of the highest 
attainable standard of health  conducive to living a life in dignity.  The realization of 
the right to health may be pursued th rough numerous, complementary approaches, 
such as the formulation of health polic ies, or the implementation of health 
programmes developed by the World Health Organization (WHO), or the adoption of 
specific legal instruments.  Moreover, the right to health incl udes certain components 
which are legally enforceable.1
2. The human right to health is recognized  in numerous international instruments.  
Article 25.1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms:  “Everyone has 
the right to a standard of living adequate fo r the health of himself and of his family, 
including food, clothing, housi ng and medical care and necessa ry social services”.  
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides the 
most comprehensive article on the right to h ealth in international human rights law.  
In accordance with article 12.1 of  the Covenant, States partie s recognize “the right of 
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest at tainable standard of physical and mental 
health”, while article 12.2 enumerates, by wa y of illustration, a number of “steps to be 
taken by the States parties ...  to achieve  the full realization of this right”.  
Additionally, the right to health  is recognized, inter alia, in  article 5 (e) (iv) of the 
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 1965, in articles 11.1 (f) and 12 of the Conven tion on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women of 1979 and in  article 24 of th e Convention on the 
Rights of the Child of 1989.  Several regi onal human rights instruments also 
recognize the right to health, such as the European Social Charter of 1961 as revised 
(art. 11), the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights of 1981 (art. 16) and the 
Additional Protocol to the American C onvention on Human Rights in the Area of 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1988 (art . 10).  Similarly, th e right to health 
has been proclaimed by the Commission on Human Rights,
2 as well as in the Vienna 
Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993 and other international instruments.3
 
1  For example, the principle of non-discrimination in  relation to health facilities, goods and services is 
legally enforceable in numerous national jurisdictions. 
2  In its resolution 1989/11. 
3  The Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and for the Improvement of Mental 
Health Care adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1991 (resolution 46/119) and the 
Committee’s general comment No. 5 on persons with disabilities apply to persons with mental illness; 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                           3. The right to health is closely related to and dependent upon the realization of 
other human rights, as contai ned in the International Bill  of Rights, including the 
rights to food, housing, work, education,  human dignity, life, non-discrimination, 
equality, the prohibition ag ainst torture, pr ivacy, access to information, and the 
freedoms of association, assembly and movement.  These and other rights and 
freedoms address integral compone nts of the right to health. 
4. In drafting article 12 of the Covenant, the Third Committee of the 
United Nations General Assembly did not adopt the definition of health contained in 
the preamble to the Constitution of WHO, whic h conceptualizes health as “a state of 
complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity”.  However, the reference in article 12.1 of th e Covenant to “the highest 
attainable standard of physical and mental hea lth” is not confined to  the right to health 
care.  On the contrary, the drafting history and the express wording of article 12.2 
acknowledge that the right to health embraces  a wide range of socio-economic factors 
that promote conditions in which people can lead a healthy life, and extends to the 
underlying determinants of health, such as food and nutrition, housing, access to safe and potable water and adequate sanitation, safe and healthy working conditions, and a 
healthy environment. 
5. The Committee is aware that, for milli ons of people throughout the world, the 
full enjoyment of the right to health still remains a distant goal.  Moreover, in many 
cases, especially for those living in poverty, this goa l is becoming increasingly 
remote.  The Committee recognizes the form idable structural and other obstacles 
resulting from international a nd other factors beyond the cont rol of States that impede 
the full realization of article 12 in many States parties. 
6. With a view to assisting States part ies’ implementation of the Covenant and 
the fulfilment of their reporting obligati ons, this general co mment focuses on the 
normative content of article 12 (Part I), States  parties’ obligations (Part II), violations 
(Part III) and implementation at the national level (Part IV), while the obligations of 
actors other than States part ies are addressed in Part V.  The general comment is 
based on the Committee’s experience in examin ing States parties’ reports over many 
years. 
1.  Normative content of article 12 
7. Article 12.1 provides a de finition of the right to health, while article 12.2 
enumerates illustrative, non-exhaustive ex amples of States parties’ obligations. 
8. The right to h ealth is not to be unders tood as a right to be healthy.  The right to 
health contains both freedoms and entitleme nts.  The freedoms include the right to 
 
the Programme of Action of the International Conf erence on Population and Development held at 
Cairo in 1994, as well as the Declaration and Programme for Action of the Fourth World Conference 
on Women held in Beijing in 1995 contain definitions of reproductive health and women’s health, respectively. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                control one’s health and body, including sexual and reproductive freedom, and the 
right to be free from interference, such as the right to be free from torture, 
non-consensual medical treatment and experi mentation.  By contrast, the entitlements 
include the right to a system of health  protection which provides equality of 
opportunity for people to enjoy the hi ghest attainable level of health. 
9. The notion of “the highes t attainable standard of health” in article 12.1 takes 
into account both the individual’s biologi cal and socio-economic preconditions and a 
State’s available resources.  There are a number of aspects which cannot be addressed 
solely within the relationship between Stat es and individuals; in particular, good 
health cannot be ensured by a State, nor can States provide protection against every possible cause of human ill health.  Thus, ge netic factors, individual susceptibility to 
ill health and the adoption of unhealthy or ri sky lifestyles may play an important role 
with respect to an individual’s health.  Consequently, the right to health must be understood as a right to the enjoyment of a variety of facilities, goods, services and 
conditions necessary for the realization of th e highest attainable standard of health. 
10. Since the adoption of the two International Covenants in 1966 the world health 
situation has changed dramatically and the notion of health has undergone substantial 
changes and has also widened in scope.  Mo re determinants of health are being taken 
into consideration, such as resource dist ribution and gender differences.  A wider 
definition of health also takes into account such socially-related concerns as violence 
and armed conflict.4  Moreover, formerly unknown diseases, such as human 
immunodeficiency virus and acquired imm unodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), and 
others that have become more  widespread, such as cancer, as  well as the rapid growth 
of the world population, have created new obst acles for the realization of the right to 
health which need to be taken into  account when interpreting article 12. 
11. The Committee interprets the right to health, as de fined in article 12.1, as an 
inclusive right extending not only to timely a nd appropriate health care but also to the 
underlying determinants of health, such as access to safe and potable water and adequate sanitation, an ade quate supply of safe food, nutrition and housing, healthy 
occupational and environmental conditions, a nd access to health-re lated education and 
information, including on sexual and reproducti ve health.  A further important aspect 
is the participation of th e population in all health-related decision-making at the 
community, national and international levels. 
12. The right to health in all its forms a nd at all levels contains the following 
interrelated and essential elements, the pr ecise application of which will depend on 
the conditions prevailing in a particular State party: 
 
4  Common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions for the protection of war victims (1949); Additional 
Protocol I (1977) relating to the Protection of Vic tims of International Armed Conflicts, article 75 (2) 
(a); Additional Protocol II (1977) relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed 
Conflicts, article 4 (a). 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                (a) Availability.  Functioning public health and he alth-care facili ties, goods and 
services, as well as programmes, have to be available in sufficient quantity within the 
State party .  The precise nature of the faciliti es, goods and services will vary 
depending on numerous factors, including the State party’s developmental level .  
They will include, however, th e underlying determinants of health, such as safe and 
potable drinking water and adequate sanitati on facilities, hospitals, clinics and other 
health-related buildings, trained medical and professi onal personnel receiving 
domestically competitive salaries, and essential drugs, as defined by the WHO Action Programme on Essential Drugs;
5
(b) Accessibility.  Health facilities, goods and services6 have to be accessible to 
everyone without discrimination, within  the jurisdiction of the State party .  
Accessibility has four overlapping dimensions: 
Non-discrimination:  health  facilities, goods and services must be accessible to 
all, especially the most vulnerable or marginalized sections of the population, 
in law and in fact, without discrimination on any of the prohibited grounds;7
Physical accessibility:  hea lth facilities, goods and services must be within safe 
physical reach for all sections of the population, especially vulnerable or marginalized groups, such as ethnic minorities and indigenous populations, women, children, adolescents, older pers ons, persons with disabilities and 
persons with HIV/AIDS .  Accessibility also implies that medical services and 
underlying determinants of health, su ch as safe and potable water and 
adequate sanitation facilities, are within  safe physical reach, including in rural 
areas .  Accessibility further in cludes adequate access to  buildings for persons 
with disabilities; 
Economic accessibility (affordability):  h ealth facilities, g oods and services 
must be affordable for all .  Payment for health-care services, as well as 
services related to the underlying determ inants of health, has to be based on 
the principle of equity, ensuring that these services, whether privately or 
publicly provided, are affordable for a ll, including socially disadvantaged 
groups .  Equity demands that poorer households should not be 
disproportionately burdened with health expenses as  compared to richer 
households; 
Information accessibility:  accessibility includes the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
8 concerning health issues .  However, 
 
5  See WHO Model List of Essential Drugs, revise d December 1999, WHO Drug Information, vol. 13, 
No. 4, 1999. 
6  Unless expressly provided otherwise, any reference in this general comment to health facilities, 
goods and services includes the underlying determinants of health outlined in paragraphs 11 and 12 (a) 
of this general comment. 
7  See paragraphs 18 and 19 of this general comment. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                           accessibility of information should not impa ir the right to have personal health 
data treated with confidentiality; 
(c) Acceptability.  All health facilities, goods and se rvices must be respectful of 
medical ethics and culturally appropriate, i.e.  respectful of the cultu re of individuals, 
minorities, peoples and communities, sensitive to gender and life-cycle requirements, 
as well as being designed to respect confid entiality and improve the health status of 
those concerned; 
(d) Quality.  As well as being culturally acceptable, health facilities, goods and 
services must also be sc ientifically and medically appropriate and of good quality .  
This requires, inter alia, skilled medical  personnel, scientifically approved and 
unexpired  drugs and hospital equipment, safe and potable water, and adequate 
sanitation. 
13. The non-exhaustive catalogue of examples in article 12.2 provides guidance in 
defining the action to be taken by States .  It gives specific generic examples of 
measures arising from the broad definition of  the right to health contained in article 
12.1, thereby illustrating the content of that  right, as exemplified in the following 
paragraphs.9
Article 12.2 (a):  The right to mate rnal, child and reproductive health 
14. “The provision for the reduc tion of the stillbirth rate and of infant mortality 
and for the healthy development of the child” (art. 12.2 (a))10 may be understood as 
requiring measures to improve child and maternal health, sexual and reproductive 
health services, including access to fam ily planning, pre- and post-natal care,11 
 
8  See article 19.2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  This general comment 
gives particular emphasis to access to information b ecause of the special importance of this issue in 
relation to health. 
9  In the literature and practice concerning the right to health, three levels of health care are frequently 
referred to:  primary health care  typically deals with common and relatively minor illnesses and is 
provided by health professionals and/or generally trained doctors working within the community at 
relatively low cost; secondary health care  is provided in centres, usually hospitals, and typically deals 
with relatively common minor or serious illnesses that cannot be managed at community level, using 
specialty-trained health professionals and doctors, special equipment and sometimes inpatient care at 
comparatively higher cost; tertiary health care  is provided in relatively few centres, typically deals 
with small numbers of minor or serious illnesses re quiring specialty-trained health professionals and 
doctors and special equipment, and is often relatively expensive.  Since forms of primary, secondary and tertiary health care frequently overlap and often interact, the use of this typology does not always 
provide sufficient distinguishing criteria to be helpfu l for assessing which levels of health care States 
parties must provide, and is therefore of limited assistance in relation to the normative understanding 
of article 12. 
10  According to WHO, the stillbirth rate is no l onger commonly used, infant and under-5 mortality 
rates being measured instead. 
11  Prenatal denotes existing or occurring before birth; perinatal  refers to the period shortly before and 
after birth (in medical statistics the period begins with the completion of 28 weeks of gestation and is 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                           emergency obstetric services and access to  information, as well as to resources 
necessary to act on that information.12
Article 12.2 (b):  The right to health y natural and workplace environments 
15. “The improvement of all aspects of e nvironmental and industrial hygiene” (art. 
12.2 (b)) comprises, inter alia, preventive  measures in respect of occupational 
accidents and diseases; the requirement to ensure an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water and basic sanitation; the prevention and reduction of the population’s 
exposure to harmful substan ces such as radiation and harmful chemicals or other 
detrimental environmental conditions that directly or indirectly impact upon human 
health.13 Furthermore, industrial hygiene refers  to the minimization, so far as is 
reasonably practicable, of the causes of h ealth hazards inherent in the working 
environment.14  Article 12.2 (b) also embraces adequate housing and safe and 
hygienic working conditions, an adequate  supply of food and proper nutrition, and 
discourages the abuse of alcohol, and the use of tobacco, drugs and other harmful 
substances. 
Article 12.2 (c):  The right to prevention, treatment and control of diseases 
16. “The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic, occupational and other diseases” (art. 12.2 (c)) require s the establishment of prevention and 
education programmes for behaviour-related health concerns such as sexually transmitted diseases, in particular HIV/AI DS, and those adversely affecting sexual 
and reproductive health, and the promotion of social determinants of good health, 
such as environmental safety, educati on, economic development and gender equity .  
The right to treatment includes the creation of a system of urgent medical care in 
cases of accidents, epidemics and similar health hazards, and the provision of disaster relief and humanitarian assistance in emergency situations .  The control of diseases 
refers to 
 
variously defined as ending one to four weeks after birth); neonatal, by contrast, covers the period 
pertaining to the first four weeks after birth; while post-natal  denotes occurrence after birth.  In this 
general comment, the more generic terms pre- and post-natal are exclusively employed. 
12  Reproductive health means that women and men have the freedom to decide if and when to 
reproduce and the right to be informed and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable 
methods of family planning of th eir choice as well as the right of access to appropriate health-care 
services that will, for example, enable women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth. 
13  The Committee takes note, in this regard, of Principle 1 of the Stockholm Declaration of 1972 
which states:  “Man has the fundamental right to freedom, equality and adequate conditions of life, in 
an environment of a quality that permits a life of dignity and well-being”, as well as of recent 
developments in international law, including General Assembly resolution 45/94 on the need to ensure 
a healthy environment for the well-being of individuals; Principle 1 of the Rio Declaration; and 
regional human rights instruments such as article 10 of the San Salvador Protocol to the American 
Convention on Human Rights. 
14  ILO Convention No. 155, article 4.2. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                States’ individual and joint efforts to, inter alia, make available re levant technologies, 
using and improving epidemiological surv eillance and data collection on a 
disaggregated basis, the implementation or enhancement of immunization 
programmes and other strategies of  infectious disease control. 
Article 12.2 (d):  The right to he alth facilities, goods and services15
17. “The creation of conditions which woul d assure to all medical service and 
medical attention in the even t of sickness” (art. 12.2 (d)),  both physical and mental, 
includes the provision of equal and timely access to basic preventive, curative, rehabilitative health services and health  education; regular screening programmes; 
appropriate treatment of prevalent diseases, illnesses, injuries and disabilities, preferably at community level; the provi sion of essential drugs; and appropriate 
mental health treatment and care .  A further important aspect is the improvement and 
furtherance of participati on of the population in the provision of preventive and 
curative health services, such as the organi zation of the health sector, the insurance 
system and, in particular, participation in political decisions rela ting to the right to 
health taken at both the co mmunity and national levels. 
Article 12:  Special topi cs of broad application 
Non-discrimination and equal treatment 
18. By virtue of article 2.2 and artic le 3, the Covenant proscribes any 
discrimination in access to health care and underlying determinants of health, as well 
as to means and entitlements for their procurement, on the grounds of race, colour, 
sex, language, religion, political or other opi nion, national or soci al origin, property, 
birth, physical or mental disability, hea lth status (including HIV/AIDS), sexual 
orientation and civil, political, social or other status, which has the intention or effect 
of nullifying or impairing the equal enjoyment or exercise of the right to health .  The 
Committee stresses that many measures, su ch as most strategies and programmes 
designed to eliminate health -related discrimination, can be pursued with minimum 
resource implications thr ough the adoption, modification or  abrogation of legislation 
or the dissemination of information .  The Committee recalls ge neral comment No. 3, 
paragraph 12, which states th at even in times of severe  resource constraints, the 
vulnerable members of societ y must be protected by th e adoption of relatively 
low-cost targeted programmes. 
19. With respect to the right to health, e quality of access to health care and health 
services has to be emphasized .  States have a special oblig ation to provide those who 
do not have sufficient means with the neces sary health insurance and health-care 
facilities, and to prevent any discrimina tion on internationally prohibited grounds in 
the provision of health care and health serv ices, especially with respect to the core 
obligations of the right to health.16  Inappropriate health re source allocati on can lead 
 
15  See paragraph 12 (b) and note 8 above. 
16  For the core obligations, see paragraphs 43 and 44 of the present general comments. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                to discrimination that may not be overt .  For example, investments should not 
disproportionately favour expensive cura tive health services which are often 
accessible only to a small, privileged frac tion of the population, rather than primary 
and preventive health care benefiting a far larger part of the population. 
Gender perspective 
20. The Committee recommends that States integrate a gender pe rspective in their 
health-related policies,  planning, programmes and research in order to promote better 
health for both women and men .  A gender-based approach r ecognizes that biological 
and sociocultural factors play a significant role in influencing the health of men and 
women .  The disaggregation of health and soci o-economic data according to sex is 
essential for identifying and re medying inequalities in health. 
Women and the right to health 
21. To eliminate discrimination against wo men, there is a need to develop and 
implement a comprehensive national strategy for promoting women’s right to health 
throughout their life span.  Such a strategy should includ e interventions aimed at the 
prevention and treatment of di seases affecting women, as well as policies to provide 
access to a full range of high quality and affo rdable health care, including sexual and 
reproductive services .  A major goal should be reduc ing women’s health risks, 
particularly lowering rates of maternal mo rtality and protecting women from domestic 
violence .  The realization of women’s right to health requires the removal of all 
barriers interfering with access to health  services, education and information, 
including in the area of se xual and reproductive health .  It is also important to 
undertake preventive, promotive and remedi al action to shield women from the 
impact of harmful traditional cultural practices and norms that deny them their full 
reproductive rights. 
Children and adolescents 
22. Article 12.2 (a) outlines th e need to take measures to reduce infant mortality 
and promote the healthy develo pment of infants and children.  Subsequent 
international human rights instruments rec ognize that children and adolescents have 
the right to the enjoyment of the highest sta ndard of health and access to facilities for 
the treatment of illness.17  The Convention on the Rights of  the Child directs States to 
ensure access to essential health services fo r the child and his or her family, including 
pre- and post-natal care for mothers .  The Convention links these goals with ensuring 
access to child-friendly information about preventive and health-promoting behaviour and support to families and communities in implementing these practices.  Implementation of the principle of non-discri mination requires that girls, as well as 
boys, have equal access to adequate nutriti on, safe environments, and physical as well 
as mental health services.  There is a need  to adopt effective and appropriate measures 
to abolish harmful traditional practices affecting the health of children, particularly 
 
17  Article 24.1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                girls, including early marriage, female gen ital mutilation, preferential feeding and care 
of male children.18 Children with disabilitie s should be given the opportunity to enjoy 
a fulfilling and decent life and to pa rticipate within their community. 
23. States parties should provide a safe and supportive environment for 
adolescents, that ensures th e opportunity to participate in  decisions affecting their 
health, to build life skills, to acquire a ppropriate information, to receive counselling 
and to negotiate the health-beh aviour choices they make.  The realization of the right 
to health of adolescents is dependent on the developm ent of youth-friendly health 
care, which respects confidentiality and privacy and includes appropriate sexual and 
reproductive health services. 
24. In all policies and programmes aimed at  guaranteeing the right to health of 
children and adolescents their best inte rests shall be a primary consideration. 
Older persons 
25. With regard to the real ization of the right to h ealth of older persons, the 
Committee, in accordance with paragraphs 34 and 35 of general comment No. 6 (1995), reaffirms the importance of an inte grated approach, combining elements of 
preventive, curative and reha bilitative health treatment.  Such measures should be 
based on periodical check-ups for both se xes; physical as well as psychological 
rehabilitative measures aimed at maintaini ng the functionality a nd autonomy of older 
persons; and attention and care for chroni cally and terminally ill persons, sparing 
them avoidable pain and enabli ng them to die with dignity. 
Persons with disabilities 
26. The Committee reaffirms paragraph 34 of its general comment No. 5, which 
addresses the issue of persons with disabilities in the context of the right to physical 
and mental health.  Moreover, the Committee stresses the need to ensure that not only the public health sector but also private pr oviders of health se rvices and facilities 
comply with the principle of non-discrimination in relation to persons with 
disabilities. 
Indigenous peoples 
27. In the light of emerging international law and practice and the recent measures taken by States in relatio n to indigenous peoples,
19 the Committee deems it useful to 
 
18  See World Health Assembly resolution WHA47.10, 1994, entitled “Maternal and child health and 
family planning:  traditional practices harmful to the health of women and children”. 
19  Recent emerging international norms relevant to indigenous peoples include the ILO Convention 
No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (1989); articles 29 (c) 
and (d) and 30 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989); article 8 (j) of the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992), recommending that St ates respect, preserve an d maintain knowledge, 
innovation and practices of indigenous communities; Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992), in particular chapter 26; and Part I, paragraph 20, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (1993), stating that States should take concerted positive 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                           identify elements that would help to defi ne indigenous peoples’ right to health in 
order better to enable States with indi genous peoples to implement the provisions 
contained in article 12 of the Covenant.  The Committee considers that indigenous 
peoples have the right to specific measures to improve their access to health services 
and care.  These health servic es should be culturally appropriate, taking into account 
traditional preventive care, healing practices and medicines.  States should provide resources for indigenous peoples  to design, deliver and control such services so that 
they may enjoy the highest attainable stan dard of physical and mental health.  The 
vital medicinal plants, animals and minerals necessary to the full enjoyment of health of indigenous peoples should also be protected.  The Committee notes that, in indigenous communities, the heal th of the individual is ofte n linked to the health of 
the society as a whole and has a collective dimension.  In this respect, the Committee 
considers that development-related activit ies that lead to the displacement of 
indigenous peoples against their will fr om their traditional territories and 
environment, denying them their sources of  nutrition and breaking their symbiotic 
relationship with their lands, has a deleterious effect  on their health. 
Limitations 
28. Issues of public health are sometimes used by States as grounds for limiting the exercise of other fundamental rights.  The Committee wishes to emphasize that the 
Covenant’s limitation clause, article 4, is pr imarily intended to protect the rights of 
individuals rather than to permit the imposition of limitations  by States.  Consequently 
a State party which, for example, restricts the movement of, or incarcerates, persons 
with transmissible diseases such as HIV/AIDS, refuses to allow doctors to treat persons believed to be opposed to a Gove rnment, or fails to  provide immunization 
against the community’s major infectious  diseases, on grounds such as national 
security or the preservation of public order,  has the burden of ju stifying such serious 
measures in relation to each of the elements identified in article 4.  Such restrictions 
must be in accordance with the law, including international human rights standards, compatible with the nature of the rights pr otected by the Covenant, in the interest of 
legitimate aims pursued, and strictly nece ssary for the promotion of the general 
welfare in a democratic society. 
29. In line with article 5.1, such limitations must be proportional, i.e. the least 
restrictive alternative must be adopted where several types of limitati ons are available.  
Even where such limitations on grounds of protecting public h ealth are basically 
permitted, they should be of limited duration and subject to review. 
 
steps to ensure respect for all human rights of indigenous people, on the basis of non-discrimination.  
See also the preamble and articl e 3 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(1992); and article 10 (2) (e) of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Countries 
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or  Desertification, Particularly in Africa (1994).  During recent 
years an increasing number of States have changed their constitutions and introduced legislation recognizing specific rights of indigenous peoples. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                2.  States parties’ obligations 
General legal obligations 
30. While the Covenant provides for progr essive realization and acknowledges the 
constraints due to the limits of available resources, it also impos es on States parties 
various obligations which are of immediate effect.  States parties have immediate 
obligations in relation to the right to healt h, such as the guarantee that the right will be 
exercised without discriminati on of any kind (art. 2.2) and the obligation to take steps 
(art. 2.1) towards the full realization of article 12.  Such steps must be deliberate, 
concrete and targeted towards the full realization of the right to health.20
31. The progressive realizati on of the right to health over a period of time should 
not be interpreted as deprivi ng States parties’ obligations of all meaningful content.  
Rather, progressive realization means th at States parties have a specific and 
continuing obligation to move as expeditious ly and effectively as possible towards the 
full realization of article 12.21
32. As with all other rights in the Covenant, there is a strong presumption that retrogressive measures taken in relation to th e right to health are not permissible.  If 
any deliberately retrogressive measures are taken, the State part y has the burden of 
proving that they have been introduced after the most careful consideration of all 
alternatives and that they are duly justifie d by reference to the totality of the rights 
provided for in the Covenant in the cont ext of the full use of  the State party’s 
maximum available resources.
22
33. The right to health, like all human right s, imposes three types or levels of 
obligations on States partie s:  the obligations to respect , protect and fulfil .  In turn, the 
obligation to fulfil contains obligations  to facilitate, provide and promote.23  T h e  
obligation to respect requires States to refrain from in terfering directly or indirectly 
with the enjoyment of the right to health.  The obligation to protect  requires States to 
take measures that prevent third parties from  interfering with arti cle 12 guarantees.  
Finally, the obligation to fulfil  requires States to adopt appropriate legislative, 
administrative, budgetary, judicial, promoti onal and other measures towards the full 
realization of the right to health. 
 
20  See general comment No. 13, paragraph 43. 
21  See general comment No. 3, paragraph 9; general comment No. 13, paragraph 44. 
22  See general comment No. 3, paragraph 9; general comment No. 13, paragraph 45. 
23  According to general comments Nos. 12 and 13, th e obligation to fulfil incorporates an obligation to 
facilitate and an obligation to provide .  In the present general comment, the obligation to fulfil also 
incorporates an obligation to promote  because of the critical importance of health promotion in the 
work of WHO and elsewhere. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                Specific legal obligations 
34. In particular, States are under the obligation to respect  the right to health by, 
inter alia, refraining from denying or lim iting equal access for all persons, including 
prisoners or detainees, minorities, asyl um-seekers and illegal immigrants, to 
preventive, curative and palliative h ealth services; abstaining from enforcing 
discriminatory practices as a State policy; and abstaining from imposing 
discriminatory practices relating to women’s health status and needs.  Furthermore, 
obligations to respect include a State’s obligation to refrain from prohibiting or 
impeding traditional preventive care, healing practices and medicines, from marketing unsafe drugs and from applying coercive me dical treatments, unle ss on an exceptional 
basis for the treatment of mental illn ess or the preventi on and control of 
communicable diseases.  Such exceptional cases should be subject to specific and 
restrictive conditions, respecti ng best practices and applicab le international standards, 
including the Principles for the Protection of Persons with Ment al Illness and the 
Improvement of Mental Health Care.
24  In addition, States should refrain from 
limiting access to contraceptives and other means of maintaining sexual and reproductive health, from censoring, withhol ding or intentionally misrepresenting 
health-related information, including sexua l education and information, as well as 
from preventing people’s participation in health-related matters.  States should also 
refrain from unlawfully polluting air, wate r and soil, e.g. through industrial waste 
from State-owned facilities, from using or testing nuclear, biological or chemical weapons if such testing results in the rele ase of substances harmful to human health, 
and from limiting access to heal th services as a punitive measure, e.g. during armed 
conflicts in violation of inte rnational humanitarian law. 
35. Obligations to protect  include, inter alia, the duties of States to adopt 
legislation or to take other measures ensuring equal access to health care and health-related services provided by third parties; to ensure that privatization of the 
health sector does not constitute a threat to the availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality of health  facilities, goods a nd services; to control the marketing of 
medical equipment and medicines by third parties; and to ensure that medical 
practitioners and other health  professionals meet appropria te standards of education, 
skill and ethical codes of c onduct.  States are also oblig ed to ensure that harmful 
social or traditional practices do not interfere with access to pre- and post-natal care and family planning; to prevent third parties from coercing women to undergo traditional practices, e.g. female genital mutilation; and to take measures to protect all vulnerable or marginalized groups of so ciety, in particular women, children, 
adolescents and older persons, in the light of gender-based expre ssions of violence.  
States should also ensure that third parties do not limit people’s access to health-related information and services. 
36. The obligation to fulfil  requires States parties, inter alia, to give sufficient 
recognition to the right to health in the national political and legal systems, preferably by way of legislative implementation, and to adopt a national health policy with a 
 
24  General Assembly resolution 46/119 (1991). 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                detailed plan for realizing the right to hea lth.  States must ensure provision of health 
care, including immunization programmes agai nst the major infectious diseases, and 
ensure equal access for all to the underlyi ng determinants of health, such as 
nutritiously safe food and potable drinki ng water, basic sani tation and adequate 
housing and living conditions.  Public health infrastructur es should provide for sexual 
and reproductive health services, including  safe motherhood, part icularly in rural 
areas.  States have to ensure the appropr iate training of doctors and other medical 
personnel, the provision of a sufficient number of hospitals, clinics and other 
health-related facilities, a nd the promotion and support of the establishment of 
institutions providing counsel ling and mental health services, with due regard to 
equitable distribution throughout the count ry.  Further obligations include the 
provision of a public, private or mixed health  insurance system which is affordable for 
all, the promotion of medical research and health education, as well as information 
campaigns, in particular with respect to  HIV/AIDS, sexual and reproductive health, 
traditional practices, domestic violence, the abuse of alcohol and the use of cigarettes, 
drugs and other harmful substances.  States  are also required to adopt measures 
against environmental and occupational health hazards and against any other threat as demonstrated by epidemiological data.  Fo r this purpose they should formulate and 
implement national policies aimed at reduci ng and eliminating pollution of air, water 
and soil, including pollution by heavy me tals such as lead from gasoline.  
Furthermore, States parties are required to formulate, implement and periodically 
review a coherent national policy to minimize the risk of occupational accidents and diseases, as well as to provide a coherent national policy on occupational safety and health services.
25
37. The obligation to fulfil (facilitate ) requires States inter alia to take positive 
measures that enable and assist individua ls and communities to enjoy the right to 
health.  States parties are also obliged to fulfil  (provide) a specific right contained in 
the Covenant when individuals or a group are unable, for reasons beyond their 
control, to realize that right themselves by the means at their disposal.  The obligation to fulfil (promote ) the right to health requires States  to undertake actions that create, 
maintain and restore the health of the population.  Such obligations include:  
(i) fostering recognition of f actors favouring positive health  results, e.g. research and 
provision of information; (ii)  ensuring that health servi ces are culturally appropriate 
and that health-care staff are trained to rec ognize and respond to the specific needs of 
vulnerable or marginalized gr oups; (iii) ensuring that the St ate meets its obligations in 
the dissemination of appropriate informa tion relating to healthy lifestyles and 
 
25  Elements of such a policy are the identification, determination, authorization and control of 
dangerous materials, equipment, substances, agents and work processes; the provision of health 
information to workers and the provision, if needed, of adequate protective clothing and equipment; the 
enforcement of laws and regulations through adequa te inspection; the requirement of notification of 
occupational accidents and diseases, the conduct of inquiries into serious accidents and diseases, and 
the production of annual statistics; the protection of workers and their representatives from disciplinary measures for actions properly taken by them in conformity with such a policy; and the provision of 
occupational health services with essentially preventive functions.  See ILO Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155) and Occupational Health Services Convention, 1985 (No. 161). 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                nutrition, harmful traditional practices and the availability of services; (iv) supporting 
people in making informed choices about their health. 
International obligations 
38. In its general comment No. 3, the Comm ittee drew attention to the obligation 
of all States parties to take  steps, individually and thr ough international assistance and 
cooperation, especially economic and techni cal, towards the full realization of the 
rights recognized in the Covenant, such as th e right to health.  In the spirit of Article 
56 of the Charter of the United Nations, the sp ecific provisions of the Covenant (arts. 
12, 2.1, 22 and 23) and the Alma-Ata Declar ation on primary health care, States 
parties should recognize the essential role  of international c ooperation and comply 
with their commitment to take joint and se parate action to achieve the full realization 
of the right to health.  In this regard, States parties are referred to the Alma-Ata 
Declaration which proclaims that the existing gross inequality in the health status of 
the people, particularly between devel oped and developing countries, as well as 
within countries, is politically, social ly and economically unacceptable and is, 
therefore, of common co ncern to all countries.26
39. To comply with their inte rnational obligations  in relation to article 12, States 
parties have to respect the enjoyment of the right to health in other countries, and to 
prevent third parties from violat ing the right in other countries, if they are able to 
influence these third parties by way of legal or political means, in accordance with the 
Charter of the United Nations and applicab le international law.  Depending on the 
availability of resources, States should fac ilitate access to essentia l health facilities, 
goods and services in other countries, wher ever possible, and pr ovide the necessary 
aid when required.27  States parties should ensure that  the right to hea lth is given due 
attention in international agreements and, to that end, should consider the 
development of further legal instruments.  In relation to the conclusion of other 
international agreements, States parties should take steps to ensure that these 
instruments do not adversely impact upon the right to health.  Similarly, States parties have an obligation to ensure that their actions as members of international organizations take due account of the right to health.  Accordingly, States parties 
which are members of international financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and regional  development banks, should pay greater 
attention to the protection of the right to health in infl uencing the lending policies, 
credit agreements and internationa l measures of these institutions. 
40. States parties have a joint and individual respons ibility, in accordance with the 
Charter of the United Nations and releva nt resolutions of the United Nations 
General Assembly and of the World Hea lth Assembly, to cooperate in providing 
 
26  Article II, Alma-Ata Declaration, Report of the International Conferen ce on Primary Health Care, 
Alma-Ata, 6-12 September 1978, in:  World Health  Organization, “Health for All” Series, No. 1, 
WHO, Geneva, 1978. 
27  See paragraph 45 of this general comment. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                disaster relief and humanita rian assistance in times of emergency, including assistance 
to refugees and internally displaced persons.  Each State should contribute to this task 
to the maximum of its capacities.  Priority in the provision of international medical 
aid, distribution and management of resources , such as safe and potable water, food 
and medical supplies, and financial aid shou ld be given to the most vulnerable or 
marginalized groups of the population.  Moreove r, given that some diseases are easily 
transmissible beyond the frontiers of a State, the international community has a 
collective responsibility to address this pr oblem.  The economically developed States 
parties have a special responsibility and inte rest to assist the poor er developing States 
in this regard. 
41. States parties should refrain at all tim es from imposing embargoes or similar 
measures restricting the supply of another State with adequate medicines and medical 
equipment.  Restrictions on such goods should never be used as an instrument of political and economic pressure.  In this regard, the Committee recalls its position, 
stated in general comment No. 8, on the re lationship between economic sanctions and 
respect for economic, social and cultural rights. 
42. While only States are parties to the Covenant and thus ultimately accountable for compliance with it, all members of society - individuals , including health 
professionals, families, local communities, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, as well as the private business sector - have 
responsibilities regardin g the realization of the right to  health.  States parties should 
therefore provide an environment which facilitates the discharge of these responsibilities. 
Core obligations 
43. In general comment No. 3, the Committee confirms that States parties have a core obligation to ensure the satisfaction of, at the very least, minimum essential levels of each of the rights enunciated in  the Covenant, including essential primary 
health care.  Read in conj unction with more contemporary instruments, such as the 
Programme of Action of the Intern ational Conference on Population and 
Development,
28 the Alma-Ata Declaration provides compelling guidance on the core 
obligations arising from arti cle 12.  Accordingly, in the Committee’s view, these core 
obligations include at least the following obligations: 
(a) To ensure the right of access to h ealth facilities, goods and services on a 
non-discriminatory basis, especially for vulnerable or marginalized groups; 
(b) To ensure access to the minimum essential food which is nutritionally 
adequate and safe, to ensure fr eedom from hunger to everyone; 
 
28  Report of the International Conference  on Population and Development, Cairo , 5-13 September 
1994  (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18 ), chap. I, resolution 1, annex, chaps. VII and 
VIII. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                (c) To ensure access to basic shelter, housing and sanitation, and an adequate 
supply of safe and potable water; 
(d) To provide essential drugs, as from time to time defined under the WHO 
Action Programme on Essential Drugs; 
(e) To ensure equitable distribution of all health facilities, goods and services; 
(f) To adopt and implement a national public  health strategy and plan of action, 
on the basis of epidemiological evidence, a ddressing the health concerns of the whole 
population; the strategy and plan of ac tion shall be devised, and periodically 
reviewed, on the basis of a participatory a nd transparent process; they shall include 
methods, such as right to health indicator s and benchmarks, by which progress can be 
closely monitored; the process by which the strategy and plan of action are devised, as 
well as their content, shall give particular attention to all vulnerable or marginalized groups. 
44. The Committee also confirms that the following are obligations of comparable 
priority: 
(a) To ensure reproductive, maternal (pre natal as well as pos t-natal) and child 
health care; 
(b) To provide immunization against the ma jor infectious diseases occurring in 
the community; 
(c) To take measures to prevent, treat and control epidemic and endemic diseases; 
(d) To provide education and access to in formation concerning the main health 
problems in the community, including met hods of preventing and controlling them; 
(e) To provide appropriate training for h ealth personnel, including education on 
health and human rights. 
45. For the avoidance of any doubt, the Committee wishes to emphasize that it is particularly incumbent on States parties and other actors in a position to assist, to provide “international assistance a nd cooperation, especially economic and 
technical”
29 which enable developing countries to fulfil their core and other 
obligations indicated in paragraphs 43 and 44 above. 
3.  Violations 
46. When the normative content of article 12 (Part I) is applied to the obligations 
of States parties (Part II), a dynamic pr ocess is set in motion which facilitates 
identification of violations of the right to  health.  The following paragraphs provide 
illustrations of violations of article 12. 
 
29  Covenant, art. 2.1. 
 
  
  
 
 
47. In determining which actions or omissions  amount to a violati on of the right to 
health, it is important to distinguish th e inability from the unwillingness of a State 
party to comply with its ob ligations under article 12.  This  follows from article 12.1, 
which speaks of the highest attainable standard of health, as well as from article 2.1 of the Covenant, which obliges each State part y to take the necessary steps to the 
maximum of its available resources.  A St ate which is unwilling to use the maximum 
of its available resources for the realization of  the right to health is  in violation of its 
obligations under article 12.  If resource constraints render it impo ssible for a State to 
comply fully with its Covenant obligations , it has the burden of justifying that every 
effort has nevertheless been ma de to use all available resour ces at its disp osal in order 
to satisfy, as a matter of prio rity, the obligations outlined ab ove.  It should be stressed, 
however, that a State party cannot, under a ny circumstances whatsoever, justify its 
non-compliance with the core obligations set out in paragraph 43 above, which are 
non-derogable. 
48. Violations of the right to health can o ccur through the direct action of States or 
other entities insufficiently regulated by St ates.  The adoption of any retrogressive 
measures incompatible with the core obligat ions under the right to health, outlined in 
paragraph 43 above, constitutes a violation of the right to health.  Violations through acts of commission  include the formal repeal or suspension of legislation necessary 
for the continued enjoyment of the right to health or the adopti on of legislation or 
policies which are manifestly incompatible wi th pre-existing domestic or international 
legal obligations in relation to the right to health. 
49. Violations of the right to health can also occur through the omission or failure 
of States to take necessary measures arising from legal obligations.  Violations through acts of omission  include the failure to take appropriate steps towards the full 
realization of everyone’s right to the enjoym ent of the highest atta inable standard of 
physical and mental health, the failure to have a national policy on occupational safety 
and health as well as occupational health se rvices, and the failure to enforce relevant 
laws. 
Violations of the obligation to respect 
50. Violations of the obligation to respect are those State actions, policies or laws 
that contravene the standards set out in ar ticle 12 of the Covenant and are likely to 
result in bodily harm, unn ecessary morbidity and preventable mortality.  Examples 
include the denial of access to health fac ilities, goods and servic es to particular 
individuals or groups as a result of de jure  or de facto discrimination; the deliberate 
withholding or misrepresent ation of information vital to health protection or 
treatment; the suspension of legislation or the adoption of laws or policies that interfere with the enjoyment of any of the components of the right to health; and the 
failure of the State to take into account its legal obligations re garding the right to 
health when entering into bilateral or multilateral agreements with other States, 
international organizations and other enti ties, such as multinational corporations. 
 
  
  
 
 
Violations of the obligation to protect 
51. Violations of the obligation to protect fo llow from the failure of a State to take 
all necessary measures to safeguard persons within their jurisdiction from infringements of the right to health by th ird parties.  This category includes such 
omissions as the failure to re gulate the activities of indivi duals, groups or corporations 
so as to prevent them from violating the right  to health of others; the failure to protect 
consumers and workers from practices detrimental to health, e.g. by employers and manufacturers of medicines or food; the failure to discourage production, marketing 
and consumption of tobacco, narcotics and other harmful substances; the failure to 
protect women against violence or to prosecu te perpetrators; the failure to discourage 
the continued observance of harmful traditional medical or cultural practices; and the failure to enact or enforce laws to preven t the pollution of water, air and soil by 
extractive and manufact uring industries. 
Violations of the obligation to fulfil 
52. Violations of the obligation to fulfil o ccur through the failure  of States parties 
to take all necessary steps to ensure the r ealization of the right to health.  Examples 
include the failure to adopt or implement a national health policy designed to ensure 
the right to health for everyone; insuffici ent expenditure or mi sallocation of public 
resources which results in the non-enjoyment of the right to health by individuals or 
groups, particularly the vulnerable or ma rginalized; the failure to monitor the 
realization of the right to health at the national level, for example by identifying right to health indicators and benchmarks; the failure to take measures to reduce 
the inequitable distribution of health facilities, goods and services; the failure to adopt a gender-sensitive approach to health; and th e failure to reduce infant and maternal 
mortality rates. 
4.  Implementation at  the national level 
Framework legislation 
53. The most appropriate feasible measures to implement the right to health will 
vary significantly from one St ate to another.  Every State has a margin of discretion in 
assessing which measures are most suitable to meet its specific circumstances.  The 
Covenant, however, clearly imposes a duty on each State to take whatever steps are 
necessary to ensure that ev eryone has access to health faci lities, goods and services so 
that they can enjoy, as soon as possible, the highest atta inable standard of physical 
and mental health.  This requires the adoption of a national strategy to ensure to all the 
enjoyment of the right to health, based on human rights principles which define the 
objectives of that strategy, and the formul ation of policies and corresponding right to 
health indicators and benchmarks.  The national health strategy should also identify the resources available to attain defined objectives, as well as the most cost-effective way of using those resources. 
54. The formulation and implementation of na tional health strate gies and plans of 
action should respect, inter alia, the principl es of non-discrimination and people’s 
participation.  In particular, the right of individuals and groups  to participate in 
 
  
  
 
 
decision-making processes, which may affect their development, must be an integral 
component of any policy, programme or  strategy developed to discharge 
governmental obligations under article 12.  Pr omoting health must involve effective 
community action in setting priorities, making decisions, planning, implementing and 
evaluating strategies to achieve better healt h.  Effective provision of health services 
can only be assured if people’s pa rticipation is secured by States. 
55. The national health strategy and plan of action should also be based on the 
principles of accountability, transparency and independence of the judiciary, since 
good governance is essential to the effectiv e implementation of all human rights, 
including the realization of the right to hea lth.  In order to create a favourable climate 
for the realization of the right, States part ies should take appropria te steps to ensure 
that the private business sector and civi l society are aware of, and consider the 
importance of, the right to heal th in pursuing their activities. 
56. States should consider adopting a fra mework law to operationalize their right 
to health national strategy.  The framewor k law should establish national mechanisms 
for monitoring the implementation of national he alth strategies and plans of action.  It 
should include provisions on the targets to be achieved and the time frame for their 
achievement; the means by which right to h ealth benchmarks could be achieved; the 
intended collaboration with civi l society, including health experts, the private sector 
and international organizations; institutiona l responsibility for the implementation of 
the right to health nationa l strategy and plan of action; and possible recourse 
procedures.  In monitoring progress toward s the realization of the right to health, 
States parties should identify the factors a nd difficulties affecting implementation of 
their obligations. 
Right to health indicators and benchmarks 
57. National health strategies should identify appropriate ri ght to health indicators 
and benchmarks.  The indicators should be designed to monitor, at the national and 
international levels, the State party’s oblig ations under article 12.  States may obtain 
guidance on appropriate right to health indicators, which should address different 
aspects of the right to health, from th e ongoing work of WHO and the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in this field.  Right to health indicators require disaggregation on the prohibite d grounds of discrimination. 
58. Having identified appropriate right to health indicators, States parties are 
invited to set appropriate national benchmarks in relation to each indicator.  During the periodic reporting procedure the Committee will engage in a process of scoping with the State party.  Scoping involves the joint consideration by the State party and 
the Committee of the indicators and national benchmarks which will  then provide the 
targets to be achieved during th e next reporting period.  In the following five years, 
the State party will use these national benchmarks to help monitor its implementation of article 12.  Thereafter, in  the subsequent reporting proc ess, the State party and the 
Committee will consider whether or not the benchmarks have been achieved, and the reasons for any difficulties that  may have been encountered. 
 
  
  
 
 
                                                Remedies and accountability 
59. Any person or group victim of a violati on of the right to he alth should have 
access to effective judicial or other appropriate remedies at both national and 
international levels.30  All victims of such violations  should be entitled to adequate 
reparation, which may take the form of restitution, compensation, satisfaction or 
guarantees of non-repetition.  National ombudsmen, human rights commissions, 
consumer forums, patients’ rights associations or similar institutions should address violations of the right to health. 
60. The incorporation in th e domestic legal order of international instruments 
recognizing the right to health can signifi cantly enhance the scope and effectiveness 
of remedial measures and shoul d be encouraged in all cases.31  Incorporation enables 
courts to adjudicate violations of the right to health, or at  least its core obligations, by 
direct reference to the Covenant. 
61. Judges and members of the legal profession should be encouraged by States parties to pay greater attention to violations of the right to health in the exercise of their functions. 
62. States parties should respect, protect, facilitate and promote the work of human rights advocates and other members of civil society with a view to assisting 
vulnerable or marginalized groups in the realization of thei r right to health. 
5.  Obligations of actors other than States parties 
63. The role of the United Nations agencies  and programmes, and in particular the 
key function assigned to WHO in  realizing the right to hea lth at the international, 
regional and country levels, is of particular importance, as is the function of UNICEF in relation to the right to health of ch ildren.  When formulating and implementing 
their right to health national strategies, States parties should avail themselves of technical assistance and coopera tion of WHO.  Further, wh en preparing their reports, 
States parties should utilize th e extensive information and advisory services of WHO 
with regard to data collection, disaggregati on, and the development of right to health 
indicators and benchmarks. 
64. Moreover, coordinated efforts for the re alization of the righ t to health should 
be maintained to enhance th e interaction among all the act ors concerned, including the 
various components of civil society.  In conformity with arti cles 22 and 23 of the 
Covenant, WHO, the International La bour Organization, the United Nations 
Development Programme, UNICEF, the Unit ed Nations Population Fund, the World 
 
30  Regardless of whether groups as such can seek remedies as distinct holders of rights, States parties 
are bound by both the coll ective and individual dimensions of ar ticle 12.  Collective rights are critical 
in the field of health; modern public health policy relies heavily on prevention and promotion which 
are approaches directed primarily to groups. 
31  See general comment No. 2, paragraph 9. 
 
  
  
 
 
Bank, regional development banks, the Inte rnational Monetary Fund, the World Trade 
Organization and other relevant bodies wi thin the United Nations system, should 
cooperate effectively with States parties,  building on their resp ective expertise, in 
relation to the implementation of the right to health at the national level, with due respect to their individual mandates.  In  particular, the international financial 
institutions, notably the World Bank and th e International Monetary Fund, should pay 
greater attention to the protectio n of the right to health in their lending policies, credit 
agreements and structural adjustment prog rammes.  When examining the reports of 
States parties and their ability to meet the obligations under article 12, the Committee 
will consider the effects of the assistance  provided by all other actors.  The adoption 
of a human rights-based approach by United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and bodies will greatly facilitate implementation of the right to health.  
In the course of its examination of States  parties’ reports, the Committee will also 
consider the role of hea lth professional associations and other non-governmental 
organizations in relation to the States’ obligations  under article 12. 
65. The role of WHO, the Office of th e United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross/Red Crescent and UNICEF, 
as well as non-governmental organizations an d national medical associations, is of 
particular importance in relation to disaster relief and humanitarian assistance in times 
of emergencies, including assistance to re fugees and internally  displaced persons.  
Priority in the provision of international medical aid, di stribution and management of 
resources, such as safe and potable water,  food and medical supplie s, and financial aid 
should be given to the most vulnerable or marginalized gr oups of the population. 
Adopted on 11 May 2000. 
 
