ISBN: 978-92-2-126242-8
9781234567897
Understanding the Indigenous and Tribal 
Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) 
HANDBOOK 
For ILO Tripartite Constituents 
Understanding the Indigenous and Tribal 
Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) 
HANDBOOK 
For ILO Tripartite Constituents 
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE • GENEVA 
Copyright © International Labour Organization 2013 
First published 2013 
Publications of the International Labour Office enjoy copyright under Protocol 2 of the Universal 
Copyright Convention. Nevertheless, short excerpts from them may be reproduced without au -
thorization, on condition that the source is indicated. For rights of reproduction or translation, 
application should be made to ILO Publications (Rights and Permissions), International Labour 
Office, CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland, or by email: pubdroit@ilo.org. The International Labour 
Office welcomes such applications. 
Libraries, institutions and other users registered with reproduction rights organizations may make 
copies in accordance with the licences issued to them for this purpose. Visit www.ifrro.org to find 
the reproduction rights organization in your country. 
Understanding the Indigenous and Tribal People Convention, 1989 (No. 169). Handbook for 
ILO Tripartite Constituents / International Labour standards Department. International Labour 
Organization. – Geneva, 2013. 
ISBN 978-92-2-126242-8 (print) 
ISBN 978-92-2-126243-5 (web pdf) 
ILO Cataloguing in Publication Data 
The designations employed in ILO publications, which are in conformity with United Nations 
practice, and the presentation of material therein do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the International Labour Office concerning the legal status of any 
country, area or territory or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers. 
The responsibility for opinions expressed in signed articles, studies and other contributions rests 
solely with their authors, and publication does not constitute an endorsement by the International 
Labour Office of the opinions expressed in them. 
Reference to names of firms and commercial products and processes does not imply their endorse -
ment by the International Labour Office, and any failure to mention a particular firm, commercial 
product or process is not a sign of disapproval. 
ILO publications and electronic products can be obtained through major booksellers or ILO local 
offices in many countries, or direct from ILO Publications, International Labour Office, CH-1211 
Geneva 22, Switzerland. Catalogues or lists of new publications are available free of charge from 
the above address, or by email: pubvente@ilo.org 
Visit our website: www.ilo.org/publns 
Photocomposed in Switzerland SCR 
Printed by the International Labour Office, Geneva, Switzerland 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii 
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix 
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi 
Section 1 
Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
What is ILO Convention No. 169? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Who are indigenous and tribal peoples? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Do indigenous and tribal peoples have “special” rights? . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Why is the ILO concerned with indigenous peoples? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Are indigenous peoples’ labour conditions still a concern? . . . . . . . . . 4
What is the legal status of the Convention? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Who has the responsibility for implementing the Convention? . . . . . 6
How is the implementation of the Convention supervised? . . . . . . . . 7
What is the role of workers and employers’ organisations? . . . . . . . . . 8
Do indigenous peoples have access to ILO procedures 
and assistance? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
What is the contribution of ILO Convention No. 169 
to national development? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Other international instruments relevant 
to indigenous peoples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 
Section 2 
Consultation and participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
Why is consultation and participation the cornerstone 
of the Convention? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
What does the Convention say about consultation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 
v
Why does consultation with indigenous peoples require 
special attention? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
Who has the responsibility for undertaking consultations? . . . . . . . . . 14 
Who should be consulted? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 
What are appropriate procedures? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
Is there a requirement to reach consent? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
Does consultation help to prevent conflict? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
What are the barriers for conducting consultations? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 
What does the Convention say about participation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 
What is the link between consultation and participation? . . . . . . . . . . 19 
Section 3 
Lands and natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 
What is the scope of indigenous peoples’ land rights? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 
Do indigenous peoples have a right to natural resources? . . . . . . . . . . 22 
Section 4 
Implications for private sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
What are the implications of Convention No. 169 
for the private sector? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
Do companies have a general duty to respect indigenous 
peoples’ rights? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 
Annex A 
Information resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 
General information: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 
Guidance on Convention No. 169: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 
Material on indigenous peoples’ labour conditions: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 
Annex B 
Convention No. 169 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 
vi HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ACT/EMP Bureau for Employers’ Activities 
ACTRAV Bureau for Workers’ Activities 
CApp Conference Committee on the Application of Standards 
CEACR Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions 
and Recommendations 
ILC International Labour Conference 
ILO International Labour Organization 
PRO 169 Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 169 
UN United Nations 
UNDRIP UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
vii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This handbook is written by Birgitte Feiring, former Chief Technical Adviser 
of the ILO’s Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 169 (PRO 169) 
under the direction of the Director of the International Labour Standards 
Department, Ms. Cleopatra Doumbia-Henry. It draws on the wealth of com -
ments and analysis of the Convention, provided by the ILO supervisory bodies, 
in particular the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and 
Recommendations (CEACR). Further, it is inspired by a series of previous ILO 
publications on indigenous and tribal peoples and by recent studies undertaken 
by Mr. Lee Swepston and Mr. Victor Toledo. Finally, the text has been enriched 
and improved by the comments provided by staff of the International Labour 
Standards Department, the Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 169 
and representatives of the Bureau for Workers’ and Employers’ Activities 
(ACT/EMP and ACTRAV) within the ILO. 
ix 
FOREWORD 
This handbook aims to answer some of the essential questions of ILO con -
stituents regarding the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 
169). It has been elaborated in close cooperation with the Bureau for Employers’ 
Activities (ACT/EMP) and the Bureau for Workers’ Activities (ACTRAV), with 
the aim of providing the ILO constituents with a practical tool to better un -
derstand the relevance, scope and implications of the Convention and to foster 
joint efforts for its implementation. 
Convention No. 169 is a unique Convention. Adopted by the 
International Labour Conference (ILC) at its 76 th Session in 1989, in cooper -
ation with the UN-system, it represents a consensus reached by ILO tripartite 
constituents. Indigenous and tribal peoples are among the vulnerable groups 
of concern to the ILO as it pursues its mission to promote social justice, in -
ternationally recognized human and labour rights and Decent Work. 
Convention No. 169 concerns the situation of more than 5,000 indigenous 
and tribal peoples, constituting a population of more than 370 million, living 
in more than 70 countries in all regions of the world. These peoples possess 
diverse languages, cultures, livelihood practices and knowledge systems. 
However, in most countries, they face discrimination and exploitative labour 
conditions, which are interconnected with their generalized marginalization 
and poverty situation. The ILO’s concern for indigenous peoples dates back 
to the 1920s and originated in the quest to overcome the discriminatory 
working conditions they live under. In recognition of the complexities and 
specificities of indigenous peoples’ situations, Convention No. 169 takes a 
holistic approach covering a wide range of issues that affect the lives and well- 
being of these peoples. Convention No. 169 has become a global reference 
point with impact on governance and development policies that spans far be -
yond the countries that have ratified it. Further, it is an instrument for 
governments to foster a favourable environment for the creation of sustainable 
enterprises. 
xi 
The elaboration of this handbook is timely, as Convention No. 169 in 
recent years has been ratified by more States, including in Africa and Asia, and 
its implementation has become a focus of review and discussion by the ILO 
supervisory bodies and the ILO constituents. The 2008 ILO Declaration on 
Social Justice for a Fair Globalization further acknowledges that “in a world of 
growing interdependence and complexity …the fundamental values of freedom, 
human dignity, social justice, security and non-discrimination are essential for 
sustainable economic and social development and efficiency”. Indigenous and 
tribal peoples’ rights and concerns have gained unprecedented momentum, in -
tersecting with the global debate concerning human rights, governance, poverty 
reduction and economic development, social economy, climate change, sustain -
able development and environmental protection. Progressive implementation 
of the Convention is generating knowledge and experience that can inform and 
inspire further efforts. In particular, the intertwined rights to consultation and 
participation in decision-making have raised particular interest regarding the 
scope, implications and operationalization of the Convention. 
This Handbook seeks to answer some of the fundamental questions re -
garding Convention No. 169 and, in particular, questions about the purpose, 
scope and operationalization of the right to consultation. Indigenous peoples, 
like any other group, cannot directly invoke the Convention before the ILO 
supervisory bodies but use the ILO tripartite constituents in articulating their 
issues and concerns. Up to now, they have always used the trade unions in their 
own countries or internationally or have been affiliated to them or in certain 
countries established specific trade unions of indigenous peoples. The Handbook 
seeks in particular to respond to the concerns of the ILO tripartite constituents 
for an easy to use guide that will assist them in supporting the implementation 
of the rights of indigenous peoples under the Convention, understanding their 
own roles in giving effect to the Convention and assisting enterprises in being 
able to work the Convention in pursuing their investment opportunities and 
projects. 
It is my hope that this Handbook can help strengthen the dialogue between 
ILO constituents and indigenous and tribal peoples for the progressive ratification 
and application of ILO Convention No. 169. 
Cleopatra Doumbia-Henry 
Director 
International Labour Standards 
Department (NORMES) HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
xii 
SECTION 1 
Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 
WHAT IS ILO CONVENTION NO. 169? 
ILO Convention No. 169 on indigenous and tribal peoples is an international 
treaty, adopted by the International Labour Conference of the ILO in 1989. 
The Convention represents a consensus reached by ILO tripartite constituents 
on the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples within the nation-States where 
they live and the responsibilities of governments to protect these rights. It is 
based on respect for the cultures and ways of life of indigenous peoples and 
recognizes their right to land and natural resources and to define their own pri -
orities for development. The Convention aims at overcoming discriminatory 
practices affecting these peoples and enabling them to participate in decision- 
making that affects their lives. Therefore, the fundamental principles of 
consultation and participation constitute the cornerstone of the Convention. 
Further, the Convention covers a wide range of issues pertaining to indigenous 
peoples, including regarding employment and vocational training, education, 
health and social security, customary law, traditional institutions, languages, re -
ligious beliefs and cross-border cooperation. 
1The peoples concerned shall have the right to decide their own priorities for the 
process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs, institutions and spiritual
well-being and the lands they occupy or otherwise use, and to exercise control, to 
the extent possible, over their own economic, social and cultural development.
ILO Convention No. 169, article 7(1) 
WHO ARE INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES? 
“Indigenous and tribal peoples” is a common denominator for more than 370 
million people, found in more than 70 countries worldwide. They constitute 
approximately 5% of the world population but 15% of the world’s poor. 
Indigenous and tribal peoples are found in all regions of the world, from the 
Arctic to the tropical forests. There is no universal definition of indigenous and 
tribal peoples, but ILO Convention No. 169 provides a set of subjective and 
objective criteria, which are jointly applied to identify who these peoples are in 
a given country. 
Given the diversity of the peoples it aims at protecting, the Convention 
uses the inclusive terminology of “indigenous” and tribal peoples and ascribes 
the same set of rights to both groups .1In Latin America, for example, the term 
“tribal” has been applied to certain afro-descendant communities. 
2HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Subjective criteria Objective criteria 
Indigenous peoples Self-identification Descent from populations, who 
as belonging to an inhabited the country or geographical 
indigenous people. region at the time of conquest, 
colonisation or establishment of 
present state boundaries. 
They retain some or all of their own 
social, economic, cultural and political 
institutions, irrespective of their legal 
status. 
Tribal peoples Self-identification Their social, cultural and economic 
as belonging to conditions distinguish them from other 
a tribal people. sections of the national community. 
Their status is regulated wholly or 
partially by their own customs or 
traditions or by special laws or regulations. 
1 For practical reasons, this booklet uses the term “indigenous peoples”, which is also the most 
commonly accepted term and the one used in other international instruments. 
Indigenous and tribal peoples are often known by national terms such as 
adivasis, mountain dwellers, hill tribes, hunter-gatherers, and many countries 
have developed specific registers of these peoples. In some cases, where there 
has been a lack of clarity about the application of the subjective and objective 
criteria, the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and 
Recommendations (CEACR) has analysed the circumstances and provided com -
ments to the country concerned. 
DO INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES HAVE “SPECIAL” RIGHTS? 
The histories of indigenous peoples have been marked by discrimination, mar -
ginalization, ethnocide or even genocide and, unfortunately, violations of their 
fundamental rights still occur. Hence, Convention No. 169 reaffirms that in -
digenous and tribal peoples are entitled to the same human rights and 
fundamental freedoms as all other human beings. At the same time, this also 
implies that indigenous customs cannot be justified, if these are in violation of 
universal human rights. This is, for example, important in cases where indigenous 
women, with reference to customs or traditions, are deprived of fundamental 
rights, such as access to education or property. 
Indigenous peoples’ rights are not “special” rights, but are articulations of 
universal human rights, as they apply to indigenous peoples. This means con -
textualizing rights to the situation of indigenous peoples and taking the collective 
aspects of these rights into account. For example, indigenous children have the 
same right to education as all other children, but their distinct languages, histories, 
knowledge, values and aspirations should be reflected in education programmes 
and services. The Convention thus provides for special measures to ensure ef -
fective equality between indigenous peoples and all other sectors of a given 
society. However, the requirement for special measures does not mean that the 
Convention requires that indigenous peoples be given special privileges vis-à- 
vis the rest of the population. Section 1: Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 
3Indigenous and tribal peoples shall enjoy the full measure of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms, without hindrance or discrimination. The provisions of the 
Convention shall be applied without discrimination to male and female members 
of these peoples.
ILO Convention No. 169, article 3(1) 
WHY IS THE ILO CONCERNED WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLES? 
The situation of indigenous peoples has been a key concern for the ILO since 
its creation. Discrimination and exploitation of indigenous and tribal workers 
directly inspired the adoption of labour standards, such as the ILO Forced 
Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29). During the 1950s, it became increasingly 
clear that the labour conditions of these peoples were consequences of deep- 
rooted injustices and prejudices and intrinsically linked to broader issues of 
identity, language, culture, customs and land. Therefore, in 1957 and on behalf 
of the UN-system, the ILO adopted the Indigenous and Tribal Populations 
Convention (No. 107). Convention No. 107 was the first international treaty 
dealing with the rights of indigenous peoples. The Convention is still in force 
for 17 countries, where it is used as an instrument to guarantee certain minimum 
rights. It is, however, closed to new ratifications since the entry into force of 
Convention No. 169. 
Convention No. 107 had an inherent assimilationist orientation, which 
was typical of its time. It was based on the underlying assumption that the only 
possible future for indigenous peoples was integration into the larger society 
and that others should make decisions on their development. In 1986, an expert 
committee convened by the ILO Governing Body concluded that “the integra -
tionist approach of the Convention was obsolete and that its application was 
detrimental in the modern world.” Consequently, the ILO undertook a revision 
of Convention No. 107 and finally adopted ILO Convention No. 169 on in -
digenous and tribal peoples in 1989. 
ARE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ LABOUR CONDITIONS STILL 
A CONCERN? 
All available statistics and research indicate that indigenous peoples still suffer 
from the worst forms of labour exploitation and are disproportionately represented 
among the victims of discrimination, child labour and forced labour. Indigenous 
peoples face barriers and disadvantages in the labour market as they have limited 
4HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
“…the developments which have taken place in international law since 1957, as 
well as developments in the situation of indigenous and tribal peoples in all regions 
of the world, have made it appropriate to adopt new international standards on 
the subject with a view to removing the assimilationist orientation of the earlier
standards”.
Preamble, ILO Convention No. 169 
access to education and vocational training and their traditional knowledge and 
skills are not necessarily valued or in demand. Their generalized marginalization 
and poverty situation makes them vulnerable to exploitative practices such as 
bonded labour, trafficking, hazardous work and the worst forms of child labour. 
Often, indigenous peoples also face discrimination against their traditional liveli -
hood as such. This is, for example, the case when practices of shifting cultivation, 
pastoralism or hunting and gathering are restricted or their rights to land and re -
sources are not recognized. Moreover, indigenous peoples are often not aware 
of their rights and have weak connections to workers’ organizations. Convention 
No. 169 comprises a full section on indigenous peoples’ right to employment, 
vocational training and protection of their labour rights. Further, the ILO and 
its constituents are increasingly addressing the situation of indigenous peoples 
through the fundamental labour Conventions concerning non-discrimination, 
freedom from forced labour and child labour and freedom of association and 
the right to collective bargaining. 
WHAT IS THE LEGAL STATUS OF THE CONVENTION? 
Convention No. 169 is an international treaty that becomes legally-binding upon 
States through ratification. To date, it has been ratified by 22 member States of 
the ILO, located in Latin America, Asia, Africa and Europe and covering an es -
timated population of more than 50 million indigenous peoples. Beyond the 
ratifying countries, Convention No. 169 is an international reference point, which 
is cited and used by UN bodies, regional human rights bodies and national 
courts. It has inspired numerous development and safeguard policies and national 
legislative frameworks. The decision to ratify Convention No. 169, like any other 
international labour Convention, is a sovereign and voluntary decision of a State. 
It is often preceded by a long process of dialogue between the government, in -
digenous peoples, workers’ organizations and employers’ organizations, as well 
as other sectors of society. Ratifying States have an obligation to implement the 
Convention in good faith in both law and practice and to ensure that indigenous 
peoples are consulted and can participate in the process. This implies that States 
must review and adjust legislation, policies and programmes to the provisions of 
the Convention and ensure that it reaches the foreseen results in practice, including 
closing of socio-economic gaps between indigenous and non-indigenous sectors 
of society. In some of the ratifying countries, the Convention has the force of 
law upon ratification and can be invoked before domestic courts, which, in turn, 
can directly rely on its provisions. However, even in those countries where treaties 
are directly applicable, specific legislative provisions will normally be needed to 
ensure the effective application of the Convention. Section 1: Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 
5
WHO HAS THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTING 
THE CONVENTION? 
Ratification of Convention No. 169 is an important step in reversing exclusion 
and discrimination and to ensure that indigenous peoples’ rights are respected 
and socio-economic gaps are closed. The responsibility for implementing the 
Convention lies with the governments of the ratifying countries. Considering 
the broad scope of the Convention, it emphasizes that government action must 
be coordinated and systematic. In most cases, this will imply establishing mech -
anisms for coordination among several government institutions and branches, 
as indigenous issues cut across sectors and geographical regions. In some coun -
tries, the Ministry of Labour is the focal point for implementation, while in 
others it can be another Ministry or a distinct government institution with re -
sponsibility for indigenous peoples. Coordination is also necessary with 
Ministries covering other areas such as finance, health, education and social se -
curity. Throughout the Convention, it is emphasized that implementation 
measures should be planned, coordinated, executed and evaluated in cooperation 
with indigenous peoples. In order to operationalize this, the Government must 
establish mechanisms for consultation and participation. The implementation 
process will be unique for each country as it has to be tailored to the specific 
social, cultural, geographical, economic and historical circumstances. Therefore, 
the Convention provides for flexibility by stipulating that the nature and scope 
of implementation measures should be determined in accordance with the con -
ditions characteristic of each country. 
6HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Governments have responsibility to: 
•Develop coordinated and systematic action to protect the rights of indigenous 
peoples and guarantee respect for their integrity.
•Establish agencies or other appropriate mechanisms to administer 
programmes for indigenous peoples, with the necessary means to fulfill the 
functions assigned.
•Ensure that planning, coordination, execution and evaluation of programmes 
is undertaken in cooperation with indigenous peoples.
•Propose legislative and other measures and supervise their implementation.
See ILO Convention No. 169, articles 2(1), 33 (1,2) 
HOW IS THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION 
SUPERVISED? 
Ratifying States commit themselves to submit regular reports on the implemen -
tation of Convention No. 169 to the ILO, at least every five year s2. These reports 
are to be shared with workers’ and employers’ organizations at the national level. 
The ILO also encourages States in preparing the reports, to consult indigenous 
and tribal peoples in the country, through their traditional institutions. In addition 
under the ILO Constitution, workers’ and employers’ organizations can submit 
information and comments on the application of the Convention, or lodge com -
plaints (“representations”), in order to bring progress, challenges or violations to 
the attention of the ILO supervisory bodies. Reports are reviewed by the 
Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations 
(CEACR), which, in turn, issues comments to the concerned States in order to 
further guide the implementation process. The observations of the Committee 
of Experts are then brought before the tripartite Conference Committee on the 
Application of Standards, which chooses a limited number of such observations 
to discuss in the tripartite forum and issues conclusions to the States concerned. 
Representations can be filed by employers’ or workers’ organizations under Article 
24 of the ILO Constitution, for alleged violation of the Convention. These are 
then addressed by a tripartite committee set up by the Governing Body, which 
issues conclusions and recommendations. The supervision of Convention No. 
169 is a very dynamic process and a large amount of information, comments 
and conclusions have been submitted regarding the application of the 
Convention. Most of the cases that have been brought to the attention of the 
supervisory bodies concern the alleged failure to consult with indigenous peoples 
regarding measures or projects that affect their land. Section 1: Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 
7•Ratification is an international act whereby a State establishes its consent to 
be bound by a treaty.
•Every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed 
by them in good faith.
•A party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its 
failure to perform a treaty.
See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. 
2 This is not specific to C. 169. The reporting obligation is based on articles 19 and 22 of the ILO 
Constitution and applies to all ILO Conventions ratified by member States of the Organization. 
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS’ 
ORGANISATIONS? 
The ILO is based on the principle of tripartism, which includes dialogue and co -
operation between governments, employers, and workers in the formulation, 
adoption and supervision of labour standards. As with all other ILO Conventions, 
workers and employers play a crucial role in the promotion and application of 
Convention No. 169. In most cases, the ratification follows a process of aware -
ness-raising, capacity-building, analysis and dialogue between the government, 
indigenous peoples and workers’ and employers’ organisations. Following ratifi -
cation, governments are required to submit copies of their reports on application 
of the Convention to the most representative employers’ and workers’ organiza -
tions. These organizations may comment on the governments’ reports and they 
may also send comments and information on the application of the Convention 
directly to the ILO. In many cases, workers’ organisations have submitted com -
ments or representations (see above) to the ILO supervisory bodies on behalf of 
indigenous peoples’ organizations. 
ILO Tripartite Consultation (International Labour Standards) Convention, 
1976 (No. 144) and the related Recommendation No. 152 emphasize the impor -
tance at the national level of regular tripartite consultations to ensure that ILO 
standards are formulated, applied and supervised with the participation of em -
ployers and workers organizations. This leads to greater cooperation among the 
social partners, ensures stronger awareness and participation in matters relating 
to international labour standards and eventually leads to better governance. Such 
consultations may also include consultations on the preparation and implemen -
tation of legislative or other measures to give effect to ratified Conventions, e.g. 
Convention No. 169. 
In some countries, workers and employers have formed alliances with in -
digenous peoples to address issues such as the existence of forced labour among 
indigenous workers or to support economic development and establishment of 
enterprises by indigenous employers. 
8HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
ILO supervisory processes are unique in their focus on continuous dialogue with 
governments and the possibility of offering ILO technical assistance to resolve the 
problems encountered. All supervisory comments contribute to a deeper under-
standing of the implications of Convention No. 169 in specific contexts and are 
publicly available at www.ilo.org/normlex 
DO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES HAVE ACCESS TO ILO PROCEDURES 
AND ASSISTANCE? 
Indigenous peoples’ organisations are not among the ILO’s tripartite constituents, 
comprising governments, employers’ and workers’ organizations. However, indige -
nous persons or their organizations are encouraged to become members of workers’ 
and employers’ organizations. In some cases, indigenous peoples have formed spe -
cific workers’ and employers’ organizations or specific chapters within broader 
organizations. In other cases, workers’ and employers’ organizations have formed 
alliances with indigenous organizations, e.g. to address situations of forced labour. 
Access to the supervisory mechanisms under ratified Conventions, including 
Convention No. 169, is regulated by the ILO Constitution and restricted to its tri -
partite constituents. While this has been criticized by indigenous peoples, it has 
not been an obstacle in practice, as indigenous peoples have formed alliances, par -
ticularly with trade unions, to present information, comments and representations. 
The ILO has a comprehensive technical assistance programme to raise aware -
ness as well as to promote the effective application of the Convention. The 
Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 169 (PRO 169) is a unique global 
programme that provides support to ILO tripartite constituents and to indigenous 
and tribal peoples in more than twenty-five countries across Asia, Latin America 
and Africa. 
WHAT IS THE CONTRIBUTION OF ILO CONVENTION NO. 169 
TO NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT? 
In most countries, indigenous peoples have significantly higher poverty rates 
than other sectors of society, along with pronounced health and education dis -
advantages. This can, to a large extent, be related to structural discrimination, 
also reflected in low public investments on indigenous lands, e.g. in terms of 
infrastructure and communication. Moreover, the contribution of indigenous 
peoples to national economy and development often remains invisible as their 
production systems may be largely subsistence-oriented and they often work 
within the informal sectors as unskilled labourer or domestic workers. There is 
a growing recognition of the economic potential of overcoming discrimination 
against indigenous peoples, as well as the economic and development potential 
of indigenous cultures, knowledge and production systems and natural resources. 
Indigenous peoples’ rights to consultation, participation and benefit-sharing need 
to be respected in the development process in order to avoid exploitative rela -
tionships and conflicts. Section 1: Introduction to ILO Convention No. 169 
9
Convention No. 169 is an instrument for good governance and a tool for 
conflict resolution and reconciliation of diverse interests. If indigenous peoples’ 
rights and aspirations for the development process are respected, they can become 
full partners in the development process, thereby also considerably increasing 
their contribution to national economies. 
OTHER INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS RELEVANT 
TO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES 
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) was adopted 
by the UN General Assembly in 2007, after more than 20 years of negotiations 
between indigenous peoples and States. UNDRIP is thus the most recent and 
fullest expression of indigenous peoples’ aspirations. As a Declaration, the UN -
DRIP does not have the binding force of a treaty. However, it was adopted by 
the UN General Assembly and should be taken into account by all UN member 
States in good faith. The UNDRIP does not establish any new rights but instead 
reflects an articulation of existing rights to the context of indigenous peoples. 
The provisions of UNDRIP and Convention No. 169 complement each 
other. However, UNDRIP addresses additional subjects that were not included 
in Convention No. 169, such as the militarization of indigenous lands and the 
protection of traditional knowledge. UNDRIP expressly affirms indigenous peo -
ples’ right to self-determination, while Convention No. 169 does not include 
such a provision. Convention No. 169 explicitly provides for rights to participa -
tion, consultation and self-management for indigenous peoples. 
10 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
SECTION 2 
Consultation and participation 
The rights to be consulted and to participate in decision-making constitute the 
cornerstone of Convention No. 169 and the basis for applying the broader set 
of rights enshrined in the Convention. This section will answer some of the key 
questions that are often raised by ILO constituents in relation to these intertwined 
rights of indigenous peoples. 
WHY IS CONSULTATION AND PARTICIPATION THE CORNERSTONE 
OF THE CONVENTION? 
Consultation and participation are fundamental principles of democratic gover -
nance and of inclusive development. The provisions on consultation and 
participation were introduced in Convention No. 169, in order to eliminate the 
integrationist approach of the earlier Convention No. 107. Consultation and par -
ticipation are important objectives in themselves, but are also the means through 
which indigenous peoples can fully participate in the decisions that affect them. 
Consultation and participation are not rights exclusively ascribed to indigenous 
peoples. Consultation is a fundamental principle that is to be found in all other 
ILO Conventions, providing for consultation between governments, employers’ 
and workers’ organizations as well as those specifically concerned by a given 
Convention. In this regard, Convention No. 169 is no exception, but affirms the 
requirement for specific consultations with indigenous peoples. 
11 Given the enormous challenges facing indigenous and tribal peoples today, including the 
regularization of land titles, health and education, and the increasing exploitation of nat-
ural resources, the involvement of the indigenous and tribal peoples in these and other
areas which affect them directly, is an essential element in ensuring equity and guar-
anteeing social peace through inclusion and dialogue … Consultation can be an instrument
of genuine dialogue, social cohesion and be instrumental in the prevention and resolution 
of conflict.
CEACR, General Observation on Convention No. 169, 79 th Session, 2008, published 2009. 
WHAT DOES THE CONVENTION SAY ABOUT CONSULTATION? 
The general requirement to consult with indigenous peoples is reflected in Article 
6(1) of Convention No. 169. Consultation with indigenous peoples thus arises 
as a general obligation under the Convention, whenever legislative or adminis -
trative measures affect them directly. Such measures could, for example, concern 
the elaboration of national legislation regarding consultations or the construction 
of road infrastructure on the lands of a specific indigenous community. In ad -
dition, the Convention particularly emphasizes the need to consult under certain 
circumstances, including prior to exploration or exploitation of sub-surface re -
sources and prior to relocation and land alienation. 
The core area of application for the concepts of consultation and partici -
pation is in the context of relationships between indigenous peoples and States .
The requirement for undertaking consultations with indigenous peoples is both 
broad and specific. In operational terms, this will often imply establishing in -
stitutionalized mechanisms for regular and broad consultation along with specific 
mechanisms to be applied, whenever a specific community is affected. 
This is in line with the experience of the ILO Committee of Experts on 
the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR), which in its 
2009 general observation noted two main challenges: (i) ensuring that appropriate 
consultations are held prior to the adoption of all legislative and administrative 
measures which are likely to affect indigenous and tribal peoples directly; and 
(ii) including provisions in legislation requiring prior consultation as part of the 
process of determining if concessions for the exploitation and exploration of 
natural resources are to be granted. 
12 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Article 6(1) stipulates that governments should: “Consult the peoples concerned, through 
appropriate procedures and in particular through their representative institutions, whenever 
consideration is being given to legislative or administrative measures which may affect them 
directly”. 
Further, Article 6(2) of the Convention specifies that“consultations carried out in application 
of this Convention shall be undertaken, in good faith and in a form appropriate to the cir -
cumstances, with the objective of achieving agreement or consent to the proposed measures” . 
The Convention particularly emphasizes the need to consult in the following circumstances:
•Prior to exploration or exploitation of mineral and sub-surface resources (Article 15(2));
•Prior to relocation, which should take place only with the free and informed 
consent (Article 16);
•When considering alienation or transmission of indigenous peoples’ lands outside their
own communities (Article 17);
•On the organization and operation of special vocational training programmes (Article 22);
•On literacy and educational programmes and measures (Articles 27 and 28).
WHY DOES CONSULTATION WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLES 
REQUIRE SPECIAL ATTENTION? 
Indigenous peoples have the same rights as all other citizens to participate in the 
general democratic life of the State and to vote in such processes. In addition, 
States have the obligation to specifically consult with and ensure the participation 
of indigenous peoples, whenever measures are being considered which may affect 
them directly. This does not mean that indigenous peoples have special rights 
but that given their situation, special measures for consultation and participation 
are required, to safeguard their rights within the framework of a democratic State. 
The collective nature of indigenous peoples’ rights and the need to safeguard 
their cultures and livelihoods are among the reasons why governments should 
adopt special measures for their consultation and participation in decision-making. Section 2: Consultation and participation 
13 Consultation under the Convention means: 
1.Consultations must be formal, full and exercised in good faith; here must be a 
genuine dialogue between governments and indigenous and tribal peoples characterized 
by communication and understanding, mutual respect, good faith and the sincere wish 
to reach a common accord; 
2.Appropriate procedural mechanisms have to be put in place at the national level and 
they have to be in a form appropriate to the circumstances;
3.Consultations have to be undertaken through indigenous and tribal peoples’ 
representative institutions as regards legislative and administrative measures;
4.Consultations have to be undertaken with the objective of reaching agreement or
consent to the proposed measures.
Pro forma consultations or mere information will not meet the requirements of the Convention.
At the same time, such consultations do not imply a right to veto nor is the result of the 
consultations necessarily the reaching of agreement or consent.
See CEACR General Observation, 2010, published 2011. 
One of the issues that the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and 
Recommendation (CEACR) has most regularly examined since the Convention was adopted 
is the “obligation to consult”. Therefore, CEACR prepared a detailed general observation to 
further clarify the concept of consultation, which, inter alia, states:
The Committee cannot over-emphasize the importance of ensuring the right of indigenous 
and tribal peoples to decide their development priorities through meaningful and effective 
consultation and participation of these peoples at all stages of the development process,
and particularly when development models and priorities are discussed and decided. Disregard 
for such consultation and participation has serious repercussions for the implementation 
and success of specific development programmes and projects, as they are unlikely to reflect
the aspirations and needs of indigenous and tribal peoples. 
CEACR, General Observations on Convention No. 169, 2009 and 2011. 
WHO HAS THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNDERTAKING 
CONSULTATIONS? 
In the context of Convention No. 169, the obligation to ensure appropriate 
consultation clearly and expressly falls on governments and not on private 
persons or companies. In some cases, governments may delegate the operational -
ization of the consultation process to other entities. However, the responsibility 
to ensure that consultations are carried out in compliance with the provisions 
of the Convention rests with the government, even when it does not conduct 
the processes itself. 
WHO SHOULD BE CONSULTED? 
The Convention stipulates that indigenous peoples should be consulted through 
their representative institutions. What constitutes a representative institution 
should be determined taking into account the characteristics of the country, the 
specificities of the indigenous peoples and the subject and scope of the consul -
tation. Given the circumstances, the appropriate institution may be representative 
at the national, regional or community level; it may be part of a national network 
or it may represent a single community. The important criterion is that repre -
sentativeness should be determined through a process of the indigenous peoples 
themselves. This also implies, that an indigenous institution cannot claim rep -
resentativity without being able to clearly identify its constituents and its 
accountability towards these constituents. In some cases, the alleged lack of rep -
resentativeness of a given institution has been contested in court or brought to 
the attention of the ILO supervisory bodies. 
In circumstances where representation is contested or there is a diversity 
of competing institutions, the identification of a single representative institution 
may not be possible. In broad national consultations, there will be a need to 
take an inclusive approach, allowing for participation of the diversity of orga -
nizational expressions. In more specific consultations, the scope of consultations 
should be determined on the basis of the impact assessments stipulated in Article 
7(3) of the Convention. Ensuring that the institutions concerned are represen -
tative may in some cases also imply going beyond traditional institutions. For 
instance, the Convention requires that its provisions should be applied equally 
to women and men, but in some cases indigenous women may not have a voice 
in traditional decision-making. 
If the institutions consulted are not considered representative by the people 
they claim to represent, the consultation may have no legitimacy. “If an appro -
priate consultation process is not developed with the indigenous and tribal 
14 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
institutions or organizations that are truly representative of the communities af -
fected, the resulting consultations will not comply with the requirements of the 
Convention” (ILO Governing Body, 282nd session, 2001, GB.282/14/2). 
Further, the Convention provides in Article 6(1)(c) that government shall 
“establish means for the full development of these peoples’ own institutions 
and initiatives, and in appropriate cases provide the resources necessary for this 
purpose”. 
WHAT ARE APPROPRIATE PROCEDURES? 
The requirement that consultations should take place through appropriate pro -
cedures implies that consultations should take place in a climate of mutual trust. 
In general, Governments need to recognize representative organizations and 
both parties should endeavor to reach an agreement, conduct genuine and con -
structive negotiations, avoid unjustified delays, comply with the agreements 
which are concluded and implement them in good faith. Governments also 
need to ensure that indigenous peoples have all relevant information and that 
it can be fully understood by them. Sufficient time must be given to allow in -
digenous peoples to engage their own decision-making processes and participate 
effectively in decisions taken, in a manner consistent with their cultural and 
social traditions. Thus, consultation often means establishing an intercultural 
dialogue. This means making a real effort to understand how indigenous peoples’ 
cultures and traditional decision-making processes function, and adapting the 
form and timing of consultation to these. 
Procedures are thus considered appropriate if they create favourable con -
ditions for achieving agreement or consent to the proposed measures, 
independent of the result obtained. General public hearing processes would not 
normally be sufficient. The form and content of the consultation procedures 
and mechanisms need to allow the full expression of the viewpoints of the 
peoples concerned, in a timely manner and based on their full understanding 
of the issues involved, so they may be able to affect the outcome and a consensus 
could be achieved, and be conducted in a manner that is acceptable to all parties. 
The Committee of Experts has emphasized that there should be a periodic eval -
uation of the operation of the consultation mechanisms, with the participation 
of indigenous peoples, with a view to continuing to improve their effectiveness. Section 2: Consultation and participation 
15 When it comes to determining what institutions are representative, the ILO super-
visory bodies have stated that “the important thing is that they should be the result
of a process carried out by the indigenous peoples themselves” 
Governing Body, 289 th session, 2004, document GB.282/17/3 
IS THERE A REQUIREMENT TO REACH CONSENT? 
As stipulated by Article 6(2), consultations must be undertaken in good faith 
and with the objective of obtaining agreement or consent. In this sense, 
Convention No. 169 does not provide indigenous peoples with a veto right, 
as obtaining the agreement or consent is the purpose of engaging in the con -
sultation process, and is not an independent requirement. On the other hand, 
the ILO supervisory bodies have clearly stated that a simple information 
meeting, where indigenous peoples could be heard without having any possi -
bility of influencing decision-making, cannot be considered as complying with 
the provisions of the Convention. The adequate implementation of the right 
to consultation thus implies a qualitative process of good faith negotiations 
and dialogue, through which agreement and consent can be achieved if possible. 
Here again, it is appropriate to underline the interconnection between broad 
and specific consultations. If indigenous peoples’ rights, concerns and aspirations 
are reflected in legislation and broader policies, it will likely be easier to reach 
agreement and consent on specific measures or projects affecting their lands 
and territories. It must also be highlighted that even if the consultation process 
has been concluded without agreement or consent, the decision taken by the 
State must still respect the substantive rights recognized by the Convention, 
e.g. indigenous peoples’ rights to land and to property. The more severe the 
potential consequences are for the concerned indigenous peoples, the greater 
is the importance of obtaining agreement or consent. If, for instance, the con -
tinued existence of an indigenous culture is at stake, the need for consent to 
proposed measures is more important than in cases where decisions might result 
in minor inconveniences, without severe and lasting consequences. 
Convention No. 169 in its Article 16, paragraph 2 provides for “free and 
infor med consent” of indigenous and tribal peoples where relocation of these 
peoples from lands which they occupy is considered necessary as an exceptional 
measure. 3
DOES CONSULTATION HELP TO PREVENT CONFLICT? 
Effective consultation and participation are principles of good governance and 
are means to reconcile different interests and pursue objectives of inclusive 
democracy, stability and economic development. In contrast, the lack of effective 
consultation will often lead to further exclusion and, in the worst cases, conflicts 
16 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
3 See more on relocation at page 21. 
and confrontations. Convention No. 169 has twice been ratified as an integral 
element of peace accords, to put an end to civil wars that were rooted in the 
exclusion of certain sectors of the population (Guatemala, 1996; Nepal, 2007). 
At the local level, consultation is the mechanism for establishing dialogue and 
facilitating agreements. Likewise, where the ILO supervisory bodies have ana -
lyzed specific situations of conflict, it has been clear that these conflicts emerged 
when the provisions on consultation and participation had not been adequately 
implemented. 
WHAT ARE THE BARRIERS FOR CONDUCTING CONSULTATIONS? 
A key obstacle to effective consultation is the situation of exclusion and mistrust, 
which often exists between indigenous peoples and States. As expressed by a 
Tripartite Committee of the Governing Body in the context of a particular country, 
“…the climate of confrontation, violence and lack of mutual trust stopped the 
consultations from being conducted more productively. It is imperative in all 
consultations to establish a climate of mutual trust, but all the more so with 
respect to indigenous peoples, given their lack of trust in state institutions and 
their feeling of marginalization, both of which have their origins in extremely 
old and complex historic events, and both of which have yet to be overcome” 4.
There are other reasons related to the failure to consult adequately, in -
cluding the fact that widespread recognition of this right is fairly recent and 
both governments and indigenous peoples are in the process of developing ap -
propriate institutions and modalities for consultations. As noted by the CEACR 
in its general observation, “[i]n certain cases, agencies have been established 
with responsibility for indigenous or tribal peoples’ rights, however, with little 
or no participation of these peoples, or with insufficient resources or influence. 
For example, the key decisions affecting indigenous or tribal peoples are in 
many cases made by ministries responsible for mining or finance, without any 
coordination with the agency responsible for indigenous or tribal peoples’ rights. 
As a result, these peoples do not have a real voice in the policies likely to affect 
them. While the Convention does not impose a specific model of participation, 
it does require the existence or establishment of agencies or other appropriate 
mechanisms, with the means necessary for the proper fulfillment of their func -
tions, and the effective participation of indigenous and tribal peoples. Such 
agencies or mechanisms are yet to be established in a number of countries that 
have ratified the Convention” (CEACR 2008, published 2009). Section 2: Consultation and participation 
17 4 Governing Body, 289 th session, march 2004. Representation made under article 24 of the ILO 
Constitution, Mexico, GB 289/17/3. 
WHAT DOES THE CONVENTION SAY ABOUT PARTICIPATION? 
The concept of participation is closely linked to that of consultation. In a general 
manner, Convention No. 169 states in Article 6(1) that governments shall “es -
tablish means by which these peoples can freely participate, to at least the same 
extent as other sectors of the population, at all levels of decision-making in 
elective institutions and administrative and other bodies responsible for policies 
and programmes which concern them”. 
The Convention thus recognizes that indigenous peoples often are in a 
disadvantaged position, which hinders their equal participation. This happens, 
for example, in the numerous cases where indigenous peoples, and in particular 
women, do not have recognized citizenship or identification documents, which 
would allow for their participation in elective processes. In other cases, electoral 
rules do not allow for minority representation, implying that indigenous peoples 
may be effectively excluded from participating in decision-making. 
In addition, Article 7(1) of Convention No. 169 specifically stipulates that 
indigenous peoples shall “participate in the formulation, implementation and 
evaluation of plans and programmes for national and regional development 
which may affect them directly”. Further, Article 33 of the Convention requires 
governments to establish agencies or other appropriate mechanisms to ensure 
“the planning, coordination, execution and evaluation, in cooperation with the 
peoples concerned, of the measures provided for in this Convention”. 
Convention No. 169 contains numerous references to the concept of par -
ticipation and also uses other terms such as the obligation to “cooperate” with 
indigenous peoples; the obligation not to take measures contrary to the “freely- 
expressed wishes” of indigenous peoples; and the obligation to seek “free and 
informed consent” of indigenous peoples where “relocation…is considered nec -
essary as an exceptional measure”. 
18 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Members of indigenous peoples shall benefit on an equal footing from the rights 
and opportunities which national laws and regulations grant to other members of
the population.
Enjoyment of the general right of citizenship, without any discrimination, shall not
be prejudiced in any way by special measures established to  safeguard the persons,
institutions, property, labour, cultures and environment of indigenous peoples.
See articles 2(2) (a) and 4(3) of Convention No. 169. 
WHAT IS THE LINK BETWEEN CONSULTATION 
AND PARTICIPATION? 
The right to consultation of indigenous peoples is not limited to the right to 
react to externally initiated or imposed measures. The ILO supervisory bodies 
have underlined the interconnectedness of the concepts of consultation and 
participation. This implies that indigenous peoples should not only respond 
and be able to influence externally initiated proposals, but should actively par -
ticipate and propose measures, programmes and activities that shape their 
development. Participation implies going further than mere consultation and 
should lead to concrete ownership of initiatives by indigenous peoples. In this 
sense, the intertwined concepts of consultation and participation are the mech -
anisms to ensure that indigenous peoples can decide their own priorities for the 
process of development and exercise control over their own economic, social 
and cultural development, as stipulated in Article 7(1) of the Convention. Section 2: Consultation and participation 
19 
SECTION 3 
Lands and natural resources 
Convention No. 169 is based on the recognition of the cultural and spiritual 
values that indigenous peoples attach to their land. Their rights to land and 
natural resources requires special attention, as these are fundamental to securing 
the broader set of rights related to self-management and the right to determine 
their own priorities for development. 
WHAT IS THE SCOPE OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ LAND RIGHTS? 
The Convention recognizes indigenous peoples’ rights to the land and resources 
they traditionally occupy and use in a broad sense. It gives importance to the 
concept of territories, covering the total environment of the areas they occupy. 
The recognition of land rights is based on the traditional occupation, meaning 
the land where indigenous peoples have lived over time and want to pass on 
to future generations. It is thus the traditional occupation and use which is the 
basis for establishing indigenous peoples’ land rights, and not the eventual official 
recognition or registration of that ownership. These land rights comprise both 
individual and collective aspects. Further, governments are required to establish 
procedures to identify indigenous peoples’ lands and protect their rights of own -
ership and possession, including through demarcation and titling, and to establish 
mechanisms to resolve land claims. 
The Convention includes a series of safeguards to prevent the displacement 
of indigenous peoples from their land. It establishes as a general principle that 
21 Traditional occupation confers “a right to the land, whether or not such a right
was recognized [by the State]”.
CEACR, 73 rd Session, 2002, observation, Peru, para 7 
indigenous peoples shall not be removed from their lands. Where this is un -
avoidable, it should be only as an exceptional measure. Such exceptional 
relocation should only take place with their free and informed consent. Where 
consent cannot be obtained, relocation shall take place only by following ap -
propriate procedures, which provide the opportunity for effective representation 
of the peoples concerned. Further, they have the right to return to their traditional 
lands as soon as possible. In cases where this is not possible, indigenous peoples 
should be provided with compensation and lands of an equal quality and legal 
status. 
DO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES HAVE A RIGHT TO NATURAL 
RESOURCES? 
Most indigenous peoples are highly dependent upon land and natural resources 
and have developed sophisticated livelihood practices to sustain their economy 
and the environment. Convention No. 169, as a general principle, stipulates 
that indigenous peoples have the right “to the natural resources pertaining to 
their lands”, including the right “to participate in the use, management and con -
servation of these resources”. The exception to the general principle occurs in 
cases where the State retains the ownership over mineral, sub-surface or other 
resources. In such situations, the Convention establishes a series of safeguards 
to ensure that indigenous peoples are adequately consulted and that they par -
ticipate in the benefits and receive fair compensation for any damage incurred. 
The provisions on natural resources (Article 15 of the Convention) are to be 
applied in conjunction with the general provisions on consultation and partic -
ipation (Articles 6 and 7), which are described in detail in the previous section. 
The Convention highlights the need to ascertain whether and to what extent 
indigenous peoples’ interests will be prejudiced, prior to any exploration and 
exploitation of natural resources on their lands. It is specifically emphasized 
(Article 7(3)) that impact studies should be undertaken in cooperation with in -
digenous peoples to assess the social, spiritual, cultural and environmental impact 
of planned activities and that the results of these studies shall be considered as 
22 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
The rights of indigenous peoples to the natural resources pertaining to their lands 
shall be specially safeguarded. Where the State retains ownership of mineral or
sub-surface resources, governments shall establish procedures to consult these 
peoples and ascertain if their interests are prejudiced. They shall participate in 
the benefits and receive fair compensation.
See ILO Convention No. 169, Article 15(1) and (2) 
fundamental criteria for the implementation of the activities. Further, it is im -
portant to note that the provisions regarding impact assessment and consultation 
apply not only to the actual exploitation of resources but also to the exploration 
phase. This implies that indigenous peoples must be informed, consulted and 
participate from the very outset of a planned intervention, including before con -
cessions or licenses are granted to operators. 
Inadequate implementation of the provisions regarding consultation, participation 
and impact assessment in the context of natural resource exploration and exploitation 
are quite common and are the subject of the most frequent complaints brought to 
the attention of the ILO’s supervisory bodies. Often, conflicts occur between indige -
nous peoples and private sector actors, who have obtained concessions or licenses 
from the State. In this context, it is important to underline that the responsibility 
for ensuring the correct application of the right to consultation and participation 
lies with the State. Failure to comply with this responsibility will pose a risk to the 
investments of the private sector, as indigenous peoples may rightfully invoke their 
rights under the Convention. Section 3: Lands and natural resources 
23 In 2010, the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and 
Recommendations (CEACR), in its observations on Convention No. 169, asked the 
government of Peru to “suspend the exploration and exploitation of natural resources 
which are affecting the peoples covered by the Convention until such time as the 
participation and consultation of the peoples concerned is ensured through their
representative institutions in a climate of full respect and trust, in accordance with 
Articles 6, 7 and 15 of the Convention”(Report of the CEACR, 2010, p. 784).
The CEACR, in the same year, made similar requests to suspend activities to the 
governments of Colombia (p. 762) and Guatemala (p. 768). The employers objected 
to this interpretation and “pointed out that such requests did not have a basis in 
the Convention and had to be eliminated as soon as possible. The Committee of
Experts was not a court of law and could not, in effect, request economic activity 
to stop.“ (Report of the CApp 2010, Part 1, para. 54). The Committee of Experts 
addressed this issue in a general observation published in 2011. In that context
it clarified that “In its functions, the Committee makes recommendations to promote 
the effective implementation of the Convention. Concerning the issue as to whether
the Committee can make recommendations regarding the suspension of activities 
pending consultation, the Committee wishes to state that it is clearly not a court
of law and as a result cannot issue injunctions or provisional measures. It notes 
that, in the cases in which it made a recommendation that has been interpreted 
as such, it had been communicating with the countries concerned for a number
of years requesting them to take the necessary measures to consult the indigenous 
and tribal peoples concerned in accordance with the provisions of the Convention”.
(Report of the CEACR, 2011, p. 788).
25 SECTION 4 
Implications for private sector 
WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS OF CONVENTION NO. 169 
FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR? 
Although the responsibility for implementation of Convention No. 169 lies 
with the State, the Convention has clear legal implications for private sector 
actors operating in ratifying countries. The Convention is legally binding upon 
the States that have ratified and concrete steps need to be taken by them to 
ensure that their obligations under the Convention are effectively implemented 
at the national level. However, in many countries there are still considerable 
challenges in terms of applying the Convention in law and practice, particularly 
with regard to the right to consultation. This implies that private sector actors 
risk being caught between the standards of a legally-binding instrument, which 
can be enforced through the national legal system and which is monitored 
through international supervisory mechanisms, and the practice of a given 
State, which has not taken the necessary measures to effectively implement 
the Convention. A lack of a proper domestication of Convention No. 169 in 
countries that have ratified it has led to conflict in many cases between com -
panies and indigenous peoples and put the investments of private sector 
operators at risk. Private sector actors have a direct interest in acting in accor -
dance with the principles of the Convention, for issues of legal security, 
legitimacy, partnerships and sustainability. Multinational enterprises need to 
use the principles of Convention No. 169 in good faith as well as the general 
principles of the ILO Tripartite Declaration of principles concerning multina -
tional enterprises and social policy, which call for enterprises to, inter alia, 
respect international standards concerning human and labour rights, and ho -
nour commitments in conformity with national law and accepted international 
obligations. 
26 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
The explanatory note of the International Finance Corporation of the 
World Bank (IFC) on Convention No. 169 5, provides specific guidance for com -
panies regarding the Convention. Generally, it notes that companies face a 
“reputational imperative arising from the perceived duties of companies to be 
seen to act in a way that is compliant or consistent with international law”. In 
addition, it notes the following factors, which should be considered when op -
erating in countries that have ratified the Convention: 
•Companies must comply with national law. In some ratifying countries, 
Convention No. 169 is directly applicable in the legal systems; 
•Non-compliance by governments will affect companies and may even lead 
to jeopardizing licenses and concessions; 
•There are circumstances where companies’ actions could influence or 
compromise the State’s implementation of its obligations under C169: “… 
private sector companies should not act in a manner that would interfere 
with the State’s discharge of its obligations under its international 
agreements”. 
DO COMPANIES HAVE A GENERAL DUTY TO RESPECT 
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS? 
The UN Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Business and Human 
Rights, Professor John Ruggie, has over the last years developed what is known 
as the UN Framework for business and human rights, which has been endorsed 
by the UN Human Rights Council. The UN Framework rests on three pillars: 
1) the State duty to protect against human rights abuses by third parties, including 
business, through appropriate policies, regulation, and adjudication; 2) the cor -
porate responsibility to respect human rights, which means to act with due 
diligence to avoid infringing on the rights of others, and; 3) greater access by 
victims to effective remedy, judicial and non-judicial (A/HRC/14/27). 
Although international law generally does not directly impose obligations 
on companies, “the corporate responsibility to respect is a standard of expected 
conduct acknowledged in virtually every voluntary and soft-law instrument re -
lated to corporate responsibility” (ibid). The UN Framework for Business and 
Human Rights outlines the following elements of the “responsibility to respect”: 
5 IFC, 2007: ILO Convention No. 169 and the Private Sector 
•It means avoiding the infringement of the rights of others and addressing 
adverse impacts that may occur. 
•The responsibility exists independently of States’ human rights duties. It 
applies to all companies in all situations. 
•The responsibility is determined by the impact caused. 
•Three sets of factors need to be considered: the country context, the impact 
of the company’s activities and abuse connected to activities. 
•The corporate response to managing the risks of infringing the rights of 
others is to exercise human rights due diligence, which comprises four basic 
components: 
1. a statement of policy articulating the company’s commitment to 
respect human rights; 
2. periodic assessment of actual and potential human rights impacts of 
company activities and relationships; 
3. integrating these commitments and assessments into internal control 
and oversight systems; and 
4. tracking and reporting performance. 
This due diligence approach is in line with the guidance of the IFC information 
note on “ILO Convention No. 169 and the private sector”, which states that: 
“In order to minimize risk, companies would be advised to satisfy themselves 
that the government has fulfilled its responsibilities”. Specifically, companies 
should look into whether: 
•The process used for identifying indigenous and tribal peoples’ lands is 
consistent with the requirements of Convention No. 169. 
•Legal or other procedures for resolving indigenous peoples’ land claims 
and disputes are acceptable and have been subject to consultation. 
•The title to land has derived originally from indigenous peoples and whether 
this title was obtained properly, in accordance with the law, and without 
taking advantage of lack of understanding of laws in order to secure 
possession. Section 4: Implications for private sector
27 
•The relevant government authorities have recognized the indigenous 
peoples’ rights to natural resources. 
•Appropriate consultation has taken place prior to the granting of exploration 
and exploitation licenses. 
•Mechanisms are in place to enable the communities concerned to participate 
in the benefits of the project and to compensate them fairly. 
28 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
29 GENERAL INFORMATION:
The ILO’s website on indigenous and tribal peoples contains a wealth of 
information materials and resources, including information about ILO technical 
assistance related to Convention No. 169: www.ilo.org/indigenous 
The Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 169 (PRO 169) has a 
particular training website, which comprises all necessary materials, including 
texts, publications, presentations and videos, for a course on indigenous and 
tribal peoples’ rights and development: 
www.pro169.org 
GUIDANCE ON CONVENTION NO. 169:
The following publications provide specific and detailed information about 
Convention No. 169: 
1. ILO. General Observation, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, ILO Committee 
of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations 81 st 
Session, 2010. International Labour Conference, 100 th session, 2011. Report 
III (1A). 
2. ILO. General Observation, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, ILO Committee 
of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations 79 th 
session, 2008. International Labour Conference, 98 th session, 2009. Report 
III (1A). INFORMATION RESOURCES ANNEX A 
3. ILO. Application of ILO Convention No. 169 by domestic and interna -
tional courts in Latin America, ILO, Programme to Promote ILO 
Convention No. 169 (PRO 169), (Geneva, 2009). 
4. ILO. Indigenous and Tribal Peoples’ Rights in Practice: A Guide to ILO 
Convention No. 169, ILO, Programme to Promote ILO Convention No. 
169, (Geneva, 2009). 
5. ILO. ILO Convention on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, 1989 (No. 169): 
A Manual. Project to Promote ILO Policy on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, 
2000. 
6. IFC Guidance Note No. 7 on Indigenous Peoples, International Finance 
Corporation, 2007. 
MATERIAL ON INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ LABOUR CONDITIONS: 
1. ILO. Eliminating Discrimination against Indigenous and tribal Peoples in 
Employment and Occupation: A Guide to ILO Convention No. 111, 
(Geneva, 2007). 
2. ILO. Guidelines for Combating Child Labour among Indigenous and Tribal 
Peoples, ILO, IPEC & PRO 169. (Geneva, 2006). 
3. E. Bedoya; A. Bedoya. Trabajo Forzoso en la Extracción de la Madera en 
la Amazonía Peruana. (ILO, Lima, 2005). 
4. Trends, Thomas, V. (Ed.). Traditional Occupations of Indigenous and Tribal 
Peoples: Emerging, Project to Promote ILO Policy on Indigenous and Tribal 
Peoples, (PRO 169). (Geneva, 2000). 
30 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
31 Convention concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries 
The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, 
Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International 
Labour Office, and having met in its 76th Session on 7 June 1989, and 
Noting the international standards contained in the Indigenous and Tribal 
Populations Convention and Recommendation, 1957, and 
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the many international 
instruments on the prevention of discrimination, and 
Considering that the developments which have taken place in international law 
since 1957, as well as developments in the situation of indigenous and tribal 
peoples in all regions of the world, have made it appropriate to adopt new in -
ternational standards on the subject with a view to removing the assimilationist 
orientation of the earlier standards, and 
Recognising the aspirations of these peoples to exercise control over their own 
institutions, ways of life and economic development and to maintain and develop 
their identities, languages and religions, within the framework of the States in 
which they live, and 
Noting that in many parts of the world these peoples are unable to enjoy their 
fundamental human rights to the same degree as the rest of the population of 
the States within which they live, and that their laws, values, customs and per -
spectives have often been eroded, and CONVENTION N o. 169 ANNEX B 
Calling attention to the distinctive contributions of indigenous and tribal peoples 
to the cultural diversity and social and ecological harmony of humankind and 
to international co-operation and understanding, and 
Noting that the following provisions have been framed with the co-operation 
of the United Nations, the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United 
Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation 
and the World Health Organisation, as well as of the Inter-American Indian 
Institute, at appropriate levels and in their respective fields, and that it is proposed 
to continue this co-operation in promoting and securing the application of these 
provisions, and 
Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to the partial 
revision of the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1957 (No. 107), 
which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and 
Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international 
Convention revising the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1957; 
adopts this twenty-seventh day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred 
and eighty-nine the following Convention, which may be cited as the Indigenous 
and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989; 
PART I.   GENERAL POLICY 
Article 1 
1. This Convention applies to: 
(a) tribal peoples in independent countries whose social, cultural and 
economic conditions distinguish them from other sections of the 
national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially 
by their own customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations; 
(b) peoples in independent countries who are regarded as indigenous on 
account of their descent from the populations which inhabited the 
country, or a geographical region to which the country belongs, at the 
time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment of present state 
boundaries and who, irrespective of their legal status, retain some or 
all of their own social, economic, cultural and political institutions. 
32 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
2. Self-identification as indigenous or tribal shall be regarded as a fundamental 
criterion for determining the groups to which the provisions of this 
Convention apply. 
3. The use of the term peoples in this Convention shall not be construed as 
having any implications as regards the rights which may attach to the term 
under international law. 
Article 2 
1. Governments shall have the responsibility for developing, with the partici -
pation of the peoples concerned, co-ordinated and systematic action to 
protect the rights of these peoples and to guarantee respect for their integrity. 
2. Such action shall include measures for: 
(a) ensuring that members of these peoples benefit on an equal footing 
from the rights and opportunities which national laws and regulations 
grant to other members of the population; 
(b) promoting the full realisation of the social, economic and cultural 
rights of these peoples with respect for their social and cultural 
identity, their customs and traditions and their institutions; 
(c) assisting the members of the peoples concerned to eliminate socio- 
economic gaps that may exist between indigenous and other 
members of the national community, in a manner compatible with 
their aspirations and ways of life. 
Article 3 
1. Indigenous and tribal peoples shall enjoy the full measure of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms without hindrance or discrimination. The pro -
visions of the Convention shall be applied without discrimination to male 
and female members of these peoples. 
2. No form of force or coercion shall be used in violation of the human 
rights and fundamental freedoms of the peoples concerned, including the 
rights contained in this Convention. Annex B: Convention No 169 
33 
34 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Article 4 
1. Special measures shall be adopted as appropriate for safeguarding the per -
sons, institutions, property, labour, cultures and environment of the peoples 
concerned. 
2. Such special measures shall not be contrary to the freely-expressed wishes 
of the peoples concerned. 
3. Enjoyment of the general rights of citizenship, without discrimination, 
shall not be prejudiced in any way by such special measures. 
Article 5 
In applying the provisions of this Convention: 
(a) the social, cultural, religious and spiritual values and practices of these 
peoples shall be recognised and protected, and due account shall be 
taken of the nature of the problems which face them both as groups 
and as individuals; 
(b) the integrity of the values, practices and institutions of these peoples 
shall be respected; 
(c) policies aimed at mitigating the difficulties experienced by these 
peoples in facing new conditions of life and work shall be adopted, 
with the participation and co-operation of the peoples affected. 
Article 6 
1. In applying the provisions of this Convention, governments shall: 
(a) consult the peoples concerned, through appropriate procedures and 
in particular through their representative institutions, whenever 
consideration is being given to legislative or administrative measures 
which may affect them directly; 
(b) establish means by which these peoples can freely participate, to at 
least the same extent as other sectors of the population, at all levels 
Annex B: Convention No 169 
35 of decision-making in elective institutions and administrative and 
other bodies responsible for policies and programmes which concer 
them; 
(c) establish means for the full development of these peoples’ own 
institutions and initiatives, and in appropriate cases provide the 
resources necessary for this purpose. 
2. The consultations carried out in application of this Convention shall be 
undertaken, in good faith and in a form appropriate to the circumstances, 
with the objective of achieving agreement or consent to the proposed 
measures. 
Article 7 
1. The peoples concerned shall have the right to decide their own priorities 
for the process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs, institutions 
and spiritual well-being and the lands they occupy or otherwise use, and 
to exercise control, to the extent possible, over their own economic, social 
and cultural development. In addition, they shall participate in the formu -
lation, implementation and evaluation of plans and programmes for 
national and regional development which may affect them directly. 
2. The improvement of the conditions of life and work and levels of health 
and education of the peoples concerned, with their participation and co- 
operation, shall be a matter of priority in plans for the overall economic 
development of areas they inhabit. Special projects for development of the 
areas in question shall also be so designed as to promote such improve -
ment. 
3. Governments shall ensure that, whenever appropriate, studies are carried 
out, in co-operation with the peoples concerned, to assess the social, spir -
itual, cultural and environmental impact on them of planned development 
activities. The results of these studies shall be considered as fundamental 
criteria for the implementation of these activities. 
4. Governments shall take measures, in co-operation with the peoples con -
cerned, to protect and preserve the environment of the territories they 
inhabit. 
36 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Article 8 
1. In applying national laws and regulations to the peoples concerned, due 
regard shall be had to their customs or customary laws. 
2. These peoples shall have the right to retain their own customs and insti -
tutions, where these are not incompatible with fundamental rights defined 
by the national legal system and with internationally recognised human 
rights. Procedures shall be established, whenever necessary, to resolve 
conflicts which may arise in the application of this principle. 
3. The application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall not prevent 
members of these peoples from exercising the rights granted to all citizens 
and from assuming the corresponding duties. 
Article 9 
1. To the extent compatible with the national legal system and internationally 
recognised human rights, the methods customarily practised by the peoples 
concerned for dealing with offences committed by their members shall be 
respected. 
2. The customs of these peoples in regard to penal matters shall be taken into 
consideration by the authorities and courts dealing with such cases. 
Article 10 
1. In imposing penalties laid down by general law on members of these peoples 
account shall be taken of their economic, social and cultural characteristics . 
2. Preference shall be given to methods of punishment other than confinement 
in prison. 
Article 11 
The exaction from members of the peoples concerned of compulsory personal 
services in any form, whether paid or unpaid, shall be prohibited and punishable 
by law, except in cases prescribed by law for all citizens. 
Annex B: Convention No 169 
37 Article 12 
The peoples concerned shall be safeguarded against the abuse of their rights and 
shall be able to take legal proceedings, either individually or through their rep -
resentative bodies, for the effective protection of these rights. Measures shall be 
taken to ensure that members of these peoples can understand and be understood 
in legal proceedings, where necessary through the provision of interpretation or 
by other effective means. 
PART II.   LAND 
Article 13 
1. In applying the provisions of this Part of the Convention governments 
shall respect the special importance for the cultures and spiritual values of 
the peoples concerned of their relationship with the lands or territories, or 
both as applicable, which they occupy or otherwise use, and in particular 
the collective aspects of this relationship. 
2. The use of the term lands in Articles 15 and 16 shall include the concept 
of territories, which covers the total environment of the areas which the 
peoples concerned occupy or otherwise use. 
Article 14 
1. The rights of ownership and possession of the peoples concerned over the 
lands which they traditionally occupy shall be recognised. In addition, 
measures shall be taken in appropriate cases to safeguard the right of the 
peoples concerned to use lands not exclusively occupied by them, but to 
which they have traditionally had access for their subsistence and traditional 
activities. Particular attention shall be paid to the situation of nomadic 
peoples and shifting cultivators in this respect. 
2. Governments shall take steps as necessary to identify the lands which 
the peoples concerned traditionally occupy, and to guarantee effective pro -
tection of their rights of ownership and possession. 
3. Adequate procedures shall be established within the national legal system 
to resolve land claims by the peoples concerned. 
Article 15 
1. The rights of the peoples concerned to the natural resources pertaining to 
their lands shall be specially safeguarded. These rights include the right of 
these peoples to participate in the use, management and conservation of 
these resources. 
2. In cases in which the State retains the ownership of mineral or sub-surface 
resources or rights to other resources pertaining to lands, governments shall 
establish or maintain procedures through which they shall consult these 
peoples, with a view to ascertaining whether and to what degree their in -
terests would be prejudiced, before undertaking or permitting any 
programmes for the exploration or exploitation of such resources pertaining 
to their lands. The peoples concerned shall wherever possible participate 
in the benefits of such activities, and shall receive fair compensation for 
any damages which they may sustain as a result of such activities. 
Article 16 
1. Subject to the following paragraphs of this Article, the peoples concerned 
shall not be removed from the lands which they occupy. 
2. Where the relocation of these peoples is considered necessary as an excep -
tional measure, such relocation shall take place only with their free and 
informed consent. Where their consent cannot be obtained, such relocation 
shall take place only following appropriate procedures established by na -
tional laws and regulations, including public inquiries where appropriate, 
which provide the opportunity for effective representation of the peoples 
concerned. 
3. Whenever possible, these peoples shall have the right to return to their 
traditional lands, as soon as the grounds for relocation cease to exist. 
4. When such return is not possible, as determined by agreement or, in the 
absence of such agreement, through appropriate procedures, these peoples 
shall be provided in all possible cases with lands of quality and legal status 
at least equal to that of the lands previously occupied by them, suitable 
to provide for their present needs and future development. Where the peo -
ples concerned express a preference for compensation in money or in kind, 
they shall be so compensated under appropriate guarantees. 
38 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Annex B: Convention No 169 
39 5. Persons thus relocated shall be fully compensated for any resulting loss or 
injury. 
Article 17 
1. Procedures established by the peoples concerned for the transmission of 
land rights among members of these peoples shall be respected. 
2. The peoples concerned shall be consulted whenever consideration is being 
given to their capacity to alienate their lands or otherwise transmit their 
rights outside their own community. 
3. Persons not belonging to these peoples shall be prevented from taking ad -
vantage of their customs or of lack of understanding of the laws on the 
part of their members to secure the ownership, possession or use of land 
belonging to them. 
Article 18 
Adequate penalties shall be established by law for unauthorised intrusion upon, 
or use of, the lands of the peoples concerned, and governments shall take 
measures to prevent such offences. 
Article 19 
National agrarian programmes shall secure to the peoples concerned treatment 
equivalent to that accorded to other sectors of the population with regard to: 
(a) the provision of more land for these peoples when they have not the 
area necessary for providing the essentials of a normal existence, or 
for any possible increase in their numbers; 
(b) the provision of the means required to promote the development of 
the lands which these peoples already possess. 
PART III.   RECRUITMENT AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 
Article 20 
1. Governments shall, within the framework of national laws and regulations, 
and in co-operation with the peoples concerned, adopt special measures 
to ensure the effective protection with regard to recruitment and conditions 
of employment of workers belonging to these peoples, to the extent that 
they are not effectively protected by laws applicable to workers in 
general. 
2. Governments shall do everything possible to prevent any discrimination 
between workers belonging to the peoples concerned and other workers, 
in particular as regards: 
(a) admission to employment, including skilled employment, as well as 
measures for promotion and advancement; 
(b) equal remuneration for work of equal value; 
(c) medical and social assistance, occupational safety and health, all 
social security benefits and any other occupationally related benefits, 
and housing; 
(d) the right of association and freedom for all lawful trade union 
activities, and the right to conclude collective agreements with 
employers or employers’ organisations. 
3. The measures taken shall include measures to ensure: 
(a ) that workers belonging to the peoples concerned, including 
seasonal, casual and migrant workers in agricultural and other 
employment, as well as those employed by labour contractors, enjoy 
the protection afforded by national law and practice to other such 
workers in the same sectors, and that they are fully informed of 
their rights under labour legislation and of the means of redress 
available to them; 
(b) that workers belonging to these peoples are not subjected to working 
conditions hazardous to their health, in particular through exposure 
to pesticides or other toxic substances; 
40 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
(c) that workers belonging to these peoples are not subjected to coercive 
recruitment systems, including bonded labour and other forms of 
debt servitude; 
(d) that workers belonging to these peoples enjoy equal opportunities 
and equal treatment in employment for men and women, and 
protection from sexual harassment. 
4. Particular attention shall be paid to the establishment of adequate labour 
inspection services in areas where workers belonging to the peoples con -
cerned undertake wage employment, in order to ensure compliance with 
the provisions of this Part of this Convention. 
PART IV.   VOCATIONAL TRAINING, HANDICRAFTS AND RURAL INDUSTRIES 
Article 21 
Members of the peoples concerned shall enjoy opportunities at least equal to 
those of other citizens in respect of vocational training measures. 
Article 22 
1. Measures shall be taken to promote the voluntary participation of members 
of the peoples concerned in vocational training programmes of general 
application. 
2. Whenever existing programmes of vocational training of general application 
do not meet the special needs of the peoples concerned, governments shall, 
with the participation of these peoples, ensure the provision of special 
training programmes and facilities. 
3. Any special training programmes shall be based on the economic environ -
ment, social and cultural conditions and practical needs of the peoples 
concerned. Any studies made in this connection shall be carried out in co- 
operation with these peoples, who shall be consulted on the organisation 
and operation of such programmes. Where feasible, these peoples shall 
progressively assume responsibility for the organisation and operation of 
such special training programmes, if they so decide. Annex B: Convention No 169 
41 
Article 23 
1. Handicrafts, rural and community-based industries, and subsistence 
economy and traditional activities of the peoples concerned, such as 
hunting, fishing, trapping and gathering, shall be recognised as important 
factors in the maintenance of their cultures and in their economic self- 
reliance and development. Governments shall, with the participation of 
these people and whenever appropriate, ensure that these activities are 
strengthened and promoted. 
2. Upon the request of the peoples concerned, appropriate technical and fi -
nancial assistance shall be provided wherever possible, taking into account 
the traditional technologies and cultural characteristics of these peoples, as 
well as the importance of sustainable and equitable development. 
PART V.   SOCIAL SECURITY AND HEALTH 
Article 24 
Social security schemes shall be extended progressively to cover the peoples 
concerned, and applied without discrimination against them. 
Article 25 
1. Governments shall ensure that adequate health services are made available 
to the peoples concerned, or shall provide them with resources to allow 
them to design and deliver such services under their own responsibility 
and control, so that they may enjoy the highest attainable standard of 
physical and mental health. 
2. Health services shall, to the extent possible, be community-based. These 
services shall be planned and administered in co-operation with the peoples 
concerned and take into account their economic, geographic, social and 
cultural conditions as well as their traditional preventive care, healing prac -
tices and medicines. 
3. The health care system shall give preference to the training and employment 
of local community health workers, and focus on primary health care while 
maintaining strong links with other levels of health care services. 
42 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
Annex B: Convention No 169 
43 4. The provision of such health services shall be co-ordinated with other 
social, economic and cultural measures in the country. 
PART VI.   EDUCATION AND MEANS OF COMMUNICATION 
Article 26 
Measures shall be taken to ensure that members of the peoples concerned have 
the opportunity to acquire education at all levels on at least an equal footing 
with the rest of the national community. 
Article 27 
1. Education programmes and services for the peoples concerned shall be 
developed and implemented in co-operation with them to address their 
special needs, and shall incorporate their histories, their knowledge and 
technologies, their value systems and their further social, economic and 
cultural aspirations. 
2. The competent authority shall ensure the training of members of these 
peoples and their involvement in the formulation and implementation of 
education programmes, with a view to the progressive transfer of respon -
sibility for the conduct of these programmes to these peoples as appropriate. 
3. In addition, governments shall recognise the right of these peoples to 
establish their own educational institutions and facilities, provided that 
such institutions meet minimum standards established by the competent 
authority in consultation with these peoples. Appropriate resources shall 
be provided for this purpose. 
Article 28 
1. Children belonging to the peoples concerned shall, wherever practicable, 
be taught to read and write in their own indigenous language or in the 
language most commonly used by the group to which they belong. 
When this is not practicable, the competent authorities shall undertake 
consultations with these peoples with a view to the adoption of measures 
to achieve this objective. 
44 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
2. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that these peoples have the 
opportunity to attain fluency in the national language or in one of the 
official languages of the country. 
3. Measures shall be taken to preserve and promote the development and 
practice of the indigenous languages of the peoples concerned. 
Article 29 
The imparting of general knowledge and skills that will help children belonging 
to the peoples concerned to participate fully and on an equal footing in their 
own community and in the national community shall be an aim of education 
for these peoples. 
Article 30 
1. Governments shall adopt measures appropriate to the traditions and 
cultures of the peoples concerned, to make known to them their rights 
and duties, especially in regard to labour, economic opportunities, edu -
cation and health matters, social welfare and their rights deriving from 
this Convention. 
2. If necessary, this shall be done by means of written translations and 
through the use of mass communications in the languages of these 
peoples. 
Article 31 
Educational measures shall be taken among all sections of the national 
community, and particularly among those that are in most direct contact with 
the peoples concerned, with the object of eliminating prejudices that they 
may harbour in respect of these peoples. To this end, efforts shall be made to 
ensure that history textbooks and other educational materials provide a fair, 
accurate and informative portrayal of the societies and cultures of these 
peoples. 
Annex B: Convention No 169 
45 PART VII.   CONTACTS AND CO-OPERATION ACROSS BORDERS 
Article 32 
Governments shall take appropriate measures, including by means of interna -
tional agreements, to facilitate contacts and co-operation between indigenous 
and tribal peoples across borders, including activities in the economic, social, 
cultural, spiritual and environmental fields. 
PART VIII.   ADMINISTRATION 
Article 33 
1. The governmental authority responsible for the matters covered in this 
Convention shall ensure that agencies or other appropriate mechanisms 
exist to administer the programmes affecting the peoples concerned, and 
shall ensure that they have the means necessary for the proper fulfilment 
of the functions assigned to them. 
2. These programmes shall include: 
(a) the planning, co-ordination, execution and evaluation, in co-operation 
with the peoples concerned, of the measures provided for in this 
Convention; 
b) the proposing of legislative and other measures to the competent 
authorities and supervision of the application of the measures taken, 
in co-operation with the peoples concerned. 
PART IX.   GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 34 
The nature and scope of the measures to be taken to give effect to this Convention 
shall be determined in a flexible manner, having regard to the conditions 
characteristic of each country. 
Article 35 
The application of the provisions of this Convention shall not adversely affect 
rights and benefits of the peoples concerned pursuant to other Conventions 
and Recommendations, international instruments, treaties, or national laws, 
awards, custom or agreements. 
PART X. FINAL PROVISIONS 
Article 36 
This Convention revises the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 
1957. 
Article 37 
The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the 
Director-General of the International Labour Office for registration. 
Article 38 
1. This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the 
International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered 
with the Director-General. 
2. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifi -
cations of two Members have been registered with the Director-General. 
3. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve 
months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. 
Article 39 
1. A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the 
expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes 
into force, by an act communicated to the Director-General of the 
46 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not 
take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. 
2. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, 
within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned 
in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for 
in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, 
may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten 
years under the terms provided for in this Article. 
Article 40 
1. The Director-General of the International Labour Office shall notify all 
Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of 
all ratifications and denunciations communicated to him by the Members 
of the Organisation. 
2. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of 
the second ratification communicated to him, the Director-General shall 
draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon 
which the Convention will come into force. 
Article 41 
The Director-General of the International Labour Office shall communicate to 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for registration in accordance with 
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications 
and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions 
of the preceding Articles. 
Article 42 
At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the 
International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report 
on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing 
on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in 
part. Annex B: Convention No 169 
47 
Article 43 
1. Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention 
in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides- 
(a) the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall 
ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, 
notwithstanding the provisions of Article 39 above, if and when the 
new revising Convention shall have come into force; 
(b) as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force 
this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. 
2. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and 
content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the 
revising Convention. 
Article 44 
The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally 
authoritative. 
48 HANDBOOK: For ILO Tripartite Constituents. Understanding the C.169 
ISBN: 978-92-2-126242-8
9781234567897
