UNITED
NATIONS E
Economic and SocialCouncil Distr.
GENERAL
E/C.12/1999/10
8 December 1999
Original:  ENGLISH
COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC, SOCIAL
AND CULTURAL RIGHTSTwenty-first session15 November-3 December 1999
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON
ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
General Comment No.  13 (Twenty-first session, 1999)
The right to education (article 13 of the Covenant)
1. Education is both a human right in itself and an indispensable means of realizing other
human rights.  As an empowerment right, education is the primary vehicle by whicheconomically and socially marginalized adults and children can lift themselves out of povertyand obtain the means to participate fully in their communities.  Education has a vital role inempowering women, safeguarding children from exploitative and hazardous labour and sexualexploitation, promoting human rights and democracy, protecting the environment, andcontrolling population growth.  Increasingly, education is recognized as one of the best financialinvestments States can make.  But the importance of education is not just practical:  awell-educated, enlightened and active mind, able to wander freely and widely, is one of the joysand rewards of human existence.
2. The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) devotes
two articles to the right to education, articles 13 and 14.  Article 13, the longest provision in theCovenant, is the most wide-ranging and comprehensive article on the right to education ininternational human rights law.   The Committee has already adopted General Comment 11 onarticle 14 (plans of action for primary education); General Comment 11 and the present generalcomment are complementary and should be considered together.  The Committee is aware thatfor millions of people throughout the world, the enjoyment of the right to education remains adistant goal.  Moreover, in many cases, this goal is becoming increasingly remote.  TheCommittee is also conscious of the formidable structural and other obstacles impeding the fullimplementation of article 13 in many States parties.
GE.99-46216  (E)
E/C.12/1999/10
page 2
3. With a view to assisting States parties’ implementation of the Covenant and the
fulfilment of their reporting obligations, this general comment focuses on the normative contentof article 13 (Part I, paras. 4-42), some of the obligations arising from it (Part II, paras. 43-57),and some illustrative violations (Part II, paras. 58-59).  Part III briefly remarks upon theobligations of actors other than States parties.  The general comment is based upon the
Committee’s experience in examining States parties, reports over many years.
I.  NORMATIVE CONTENT OF ARTICLE 13
Article 13 (1):  Aims and objectives of education
4. States parties agree that all education, whether public or private, formal or non-formal,
shall be directed towards the aims and objectives identified in article 13 (1).  The Committeenotes that these educational objectives reflect the fundamental purposes and principles of theUnited Nations as enshrined in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter.  For the most part, they are alsofound in article 26 (2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, although article 13 (1)adds to the Declaration in three respects:  education shall be directed to the human personality’s“sense of dignity”, it shall “enable all persons to participate effectively in a free society”, and itshall promote understanding among all “ethnic” groups, as well as nations and racial andreligious groups.  Of those educational objectives which are common to article 26 (2) of theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights and article 13 (1) of the Covenant, perhaps the mostfundamental is that “education shall be directed to the full development of the humanpersonality”.
5. The Committee notes that since the General Assembly adopted the Covenant in 1966,
other international instruments have further elaborated the objectives to which education shouldbe directed.  Accordingly, the Committee takes the view that States parties are required to ensurethat education conforms to the aims and objectives identified in article 13 (1), as interpreted inthe light of the World Declaration on Education for All (Jomtien, Thailand, 1990) (art. 1), theConvention on the Rights of the Child (art. 29 (1)), the Vienna Declaration and Programme ofAction (Part I, para. 33 and Part II, para. 80), and the Plan of Action for the United NationsDecade for Human Rights Education (para. 2).  While all these texts closely correspond toarticle 13 (1) of the Covenant, they also include elements which are not expressly provided for inarticle 13 (1), such as specific references to gender equality and respect for the environment.These new elements are implicit in, and reflect a contemporary interpretation of article 13 (1).The Committee obtains support for this point of view from the widespread endorsement that thepreviously mentioned texts have received from all regions of the world.
1
Article 13 (2):  The right to receive an education - some general remarks
6. While the precise and appropriate application of the terms will depend upon theconditions prevailing in a particular State party, education in all its forms and at all levels shallexhibit the following interrelated and essential features:
2
(a) Availability - functioning educational institutions and programmes have to be
available in sufficient quantity within the jurisdiction of the State party.  What they require tofunction depends upon numerous factors, including the developmental context within which they
E/C.12/1999/10
page 3
operate; for example, all institutions and programmes are likely to require buildings or other
protection from the elements, sanitation facilities for both sexes, safe drinking water, trainedteachers receiving domestically competitive salaries, teaching materials, and so on; while somewill also require facilities such as a library, computer facilities and information technology;
(b) Accessibility - educational institutions and programmes have to be accessible to
everyone, without discrimination, within the jurisdiction of the State party.  Accessibility has
three overlapping dimensions:
 (i) Non-discrimination - education must be accessible to all, especially the
most vulnerable groups, in law and fact, without discrimination on any ofthe prohibited grounds (see paras. 31-37 on non-discrimination);
 (ii) Physical accessibility - education has to be within safe physical reach,
either by attendance at some reasonably convenient geographic location(e.g. a neighbourhood school) or via modern technology (e.g. access to a“distance learning” programme);
 (iii) Economic accessibility - education has to be affordable to all.  This
dimension of accessibility is subject to the differential wording ofarticle 13 (2) in relation to primary, secondary and higher education:whereas primary education shall be available “free to all”, States partiesare required to progressively introduce free secondary and highereducation;
(c) Acceptability - the form and substance of education, including curricula and
teaching methods, have to be acceptable (e.g.  relevant, culturally appropriate and of good
quality) to students and, in appropriate cases, parents; this is subject to the educational objectivesrequired by article 13 (1) and such minimum educational standards as may be approved by theState (see art. 13 (3) and (4));
(d) Adaptability - education has to be flexible so it can adapt to the needs of changing
societies and communities and respond to the needs of students within their diverse social and
cultural settings.
7. When considering the appropriate application of these “interrelated and essential
features” the best interests of the student shall be a primary consideration.
Article 13 (2) (a):  The right to primary education
8. Primary education includes the elements of availability, accessibility, acceptability and
adaptability which are common to education in all its forms and at all levels.3
9. The Committee obtains guidance on the proper interpretation of the term “primaryeducation” from the World Declaration on Education for All which states:  “The main deliverysystem for the basic education of children outside the family is primary schooling.  Primaryeducation must be universal, ensure that the basic learning needs of all children are satisfied, and
E/C.12/1999/10
page 4
take into account the culture, needs and opportunities of the community” (art. 5).  “[B]asic
learning needs” are defined in article 1 of the World Declaration.4  While primary education is
not synonymous with basic education, there is a close correspondence between the two.  In thisregard, the Committee endorses the position taken by UNICEF:  “Primary education is the mostimportant component of basic education.”
5
10. As formulated in article 13 (2) (a), primary education has two distinctive features:  it is“compulsory” and “available free to all”.  For the Committee's observations on both terms, seeparagraphs 6 and 7 of General Comment 11 on article 14 of the Covenant.
Article 13 (2) (b):  The right to secondary education
11. Secondary education includes the elements of availability, accessibility, acceptability and
adaptability which are common to education in all its forms and at all levels.6
12. While the content of secondary education will vary among States parties and over time, itincludes completion of basic education and consolidation of the foundations for life-longlearning and human development.  It prepares students for vocational and higher educationalopportunities.
7  Article 13 (2) (b) applies to secondary education “in its different forms”, thereby
recognizing that secondary education demands flexible curricula and varied delivery systems torespond to the needs of students in different social and cultural settings.  The Committeeencourages “alternative” educational programmes which parallel regular secondary schoolsystems.
13. According to article 13 (2) (b), secondary education “shall be made generally available
and accessible to all by every appropriate means, and in particular by the progressiveintroduction of free education”.  The phrase “generally available” signifies, firstly, thatsecondary education is not dependent on a student's apparent capacity or ability and, secondly,that secondary education will be distributed throughout the State in such a way that it is availableon the same basis to all.  For the Committee's interpretation of “accessible”, see paragraph 6above.  The phrase “every appropriate means” reinforces the point that States parties shouldadopt varied and innovative approaches to the delivery of secondary education in different socialand cultural contexts.
14. “[P]rogressive introduction of free education” means that while States must prioritize the
provision of free primary education, they also have an obligation to take concrete steps towardsachieving free secondary and higher education.  For the Committee’s general observations on themeaning of the word “free”, see paragraph 7 of General Comment 11 on article 14.
Technical and vocational education
15. Technical and vocational education (TVE) forms part of both the right to education and
the right to work (art. 6 (2)).  Article 13 (2) (b) presents TVE as part of secondary education,reflecting the particular importance of TVE at this level of education.  Article 6 (2), however,does not refer to TVE in relation to a specific level of education; it comprehends that TVE has awider role, helping “to achieve steady economic, social and cultural development  and full andproductive employment”.  Also, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that
E/C.12/1999/10
page 5
“[t]echnical and professional education shall be made generally available” (art. 26 (1)).
Accordingly, the Committee takes the view that TVE forms an integral element of all levels ofeducation.
8
16. An introduction to technology and to the world of work should not be confined to
specific TVE programmes but should be understood as a component of general education.
According to the UNESCO Convention on Technical and Vocational Education (1989), TVEconsists of “all forms and levels of the educational process involving, in addition to generalknowledge, the study of technologies and related sciences and the acquisition of practical skills,know-how, attitudes and understanding relating to occupations in the various sectors ofeconomic and social life” (art. 1 (a)).  This view is also reflected in certain ILO Conventions.
9
Understood in this way, the right to TVE includes the following aspects:
(a) It enables students to acquire knowledge and skills which contribute to their
personal development, self-reliance and employability and enhances the productivity of theirfamilies and communities, including the State party’s economic and social development;
(b) It takes account of the educational, cultural and social background of the
population concerned; the skills, knowledge and levels of qualification needed in the varioussectors of the economy; and occupational health, safety and welfare;
(c) Provides retraining for adults whose current knowledge and skills have become
obsolete owing to technological, economic, employment, social or other changes;
(d) It consists of programmes which give students, especially those from developing
countries, the opportunity to receive TVE in other States, with a view to the appropriate transferand adaptation of technology;
(e) It consists, in the context of the Covenant’s non-discrimination and equality
provisions, of programmes which promote the TVE of women, girls, out-of-school youth,unemployed youth, the children of migrant workers, refugees, persons with disabilities and otherdisadvantaged groups.
Article 13 (2) (c):  The right to higher education
17. Higher education includes the elements of availability, accessibility, acceptability and
adaptability which are common to education in all its forms at all levels.10
18. While article 13 (2) (c) is formulated on the same lines as article 13 (2) (b), there arethree differences between the two provisions.  Article 13 (2) (c) does not include a reference toeither education “in its different forms” or specifically to TVE.  In the Committee’s opinion,these two omissions reflect only a difference of emphasis between article 13 (2) (b) and (c).  Ifhigher education is to respond to the needs of students in different social and cultural settings, itmust have flexible curricula and varied delivery systems, such as distance learning; in practice,therefore, both secondary and higher education have to be available “in different forms”.  As for
E/C.12/1999/10
page 6
the lack of reference in article 13 (2) (c) to technical and vocational education, given article 6 (2)
of the Covenant and article 26 (1) of the Universal Declaration, TVE forms an integralcomponent of all levels of education, including higher education.
11
19. The third and most significant difference between article 13 (2) (b) and (c) is that while
secondary education “shall be made generally available and accessible to all”, higher
education “shall be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of capacity”.  According toarticle 13 (2) (c), higher education is not to be “generally available”, but only available “on thebasis of capacity”.  The “capacity” of individuals should be assessed by reference to all theirrelevant expertise and experience.
20. So far as the wording of article 13 (2) (b) and (c) is the same (e.g. “the progressive
introduction of free education”), see the previous comments on article 13 (2) (b).
Article 13 (2) (d):  The right to fundamental education
21. Fundamental education includes the elements of availability, accessibility, acceptability
and adaptability which are common to education in all its forms and at all levels.12
22. In general terms, fundamental education corresponds to basic education as set out in theWorld Declaration on Education For All.
13  By virtue of article 13 (2) (d), individuals “who have
not received or completed the whole period of their primary education” have a right tofundamental education, or basic education as defined in the World Declaration on Education ForAll.
23. Since everyone has the right to the satisfaction of their “basic learning needs” as
understood by the World Declaration, the right to fundamental education is not confined to those“who have not received or completed the whole period of their primary education”.  The right tofundamental education extends to all those who have not yet satisfied their “basic learningneeds”.
24. It should be emphasized that enjoyment of the right to fundamental education is not
limited by age or gender; it extends to children, youth and adults, including older persons.Fundamental education, therefore, is an integral component of adult education and life-longlearning.  Because fundamental education is a right of all age groups, curricula and deliverysystems must be devised which are suitable for students of all ages.
Article 13 (2) (e):  A school system; adequate fellowship system; material conditions of
teaching staff
25. The requirement that the “development of a system of schools at all levels shall be
actively pursued” means that a State party is obliged to have an overall developmental strategyfor its school system.  The strategy must encompass schooling at all levels, but the Covenantrequires States parties to prioritize primary education (see para. 51).  “[A]ctively pursued”suggests that the overall strategy should attract a degree of governmental priority and, in anyevent, must be implemented with vigour.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 7
26. The requirement that “an adequate fellowship system shall be established” should be read
with the Covenant’s non-discrimination and equality provisions; the fellowship system shouldenhance equality of educational access for individuals from disadvantaged groups.
27. While the Covenant requires that “the material conditions of teaching staff shall be
continuously improved”, in practice the general working conditions of teachers have
deteriorated, and reached unacceptably low levels, in many States parties in recent years.  Notonly is this inconsistent with article 13 (2) (e), but it is also a major obstacle to the fullrealization of students’ right to education.  The Committee also notes the relationship betweenarticles 13 (2) (e), 2 (2), 3 and 6-8 of the Covenant, including the right of teachers to organizeand bargain collectively; draws the attention of States parties to the joint UNESCO-ILORecommendation Concerning the Status of Teachers (1966) and the UNESCO RecommendationConcerning the Status of Higher-Education Teaching Personnel (1997); and urges States partiesto report on measures they are taking to ensure that all teaching staff enjoy the conditions andstatus commensurate with their role.
Article 13 (3) and (4): The right to educational freedom
28. Article 13 (3) has two elements, one of which is that States parties undertake to respect
the liberty of parents and guardians to ensure the religious and moral education of their childrenin conformity with their own convictions.
14  The Committee is of the view that this element of
article 13 (3) permits public school instruction in subjects such as the general history of religionsand ethics if it is given in an unbiased and objective way, respectful of the freedoms of opinion,conscience and expression.  It notes that public education that includes instruction in aparticular religion or belief is inconsistent with article 13 (3) unless provision is made fornon-discriminatory exemptions or alternatives that would accommodate the wishes of parentsand guardians.
29. The second element of article 13 (3) is the liberty of parents and guardians to choose
other than public schools for their children, provided the schools conform to “such minimumeducational standards as may be laid down or approved by the State”.  This has to be read withthe complementary provision, article 13 (4), which affirms “the liberty of individuals and bodiesto establish and direct educational institutions”, provided the institutions conform to theeducational objectives set out in article 13 (1) and certain minimum standards.  These minimumstandards may relate to issues such as admission, curricula and the recognition of certificates.In their turn, these standards must be consistent with the educational objectives set out inarticle 13 (1).
30. Under article 13 (4), everyone, including non-nationals, has the liberty to establish and
direct educational institutions.  The liberty also extends to “bodies”, i.e. legal persons or entities.It includes the right to establish and direct all types of educational institutions, includingnurseries, universities and institutions for adult education.  Given the principles ofnon-discrimination, equal opportunity and effective participation in society for all, the State hasan obligation to ensure that the liberty set out in article 13 (4) does not lead to extreme disparitiesof educational opportunity for some groups in society.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 8
Article 13:  Special topics of broad application
Non-discrimination and equal treatment
31. The prohibition against discrimination enshrined in article 2 (2) of the Covenant is
subject to neither progressive realization nor the availability of resources; it applies fully and
immediately to all aspects of education and encompasses all internationally prohibited groundsof discrimination.  The Committee interprets articles 2 (2) and 3 in the light of the UNESCOConvention against Discrimination in Education, the relevant provisions of the Convention onthe Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the International Convention onthe Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Rights of theChild and the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (Convention No. 169), andwishes to draw particular attention to the following issues.
32. The adoption of temporary special measures intended to bring about de facto equality
for men and women and for disadvantaged groups is not a violation of the right tonon-discrimination with regard to education, so long as such measures do not lead to themaintenance of unequal or separate standards for different groups, and provided they are notcontinued after the objectives for which they were taken have been achieved.
33. In some circumstances, separate educational systems or institutions for groups defined by
the categories in article 2 (2) shall be deemed not to constitute a breach of the Covenant.  In thisregard, the Committee affirms article 2 of the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination inEducation (1960).
15
34. The Committee takes note of article 2 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child andarticle 3 (e) of the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and confirms thatthe principle of non-discrimination extends to all persons of school age residing in the territoryof a State party, including non-nationals, and irrespective of their legal status.
35. Sharp disparities in spending policies that result in differing qualities of education for
persons residing in different geographic locations may constitute discrimination under theCovenant.
36. The Committee affirms paragraph 35 of its General Comment 5, which addresses the
issue of persons with disabilities in the context of the right to education, and paragraphs 36-42 ofits General Comment 6, which address the issue of older persons in relation to articles 13-15 ofthe Covenant.
37. States parties must closely monitor education - including all relevant policies,
institutions, programmes, spending patterns and other practices - so as to identify and takemeasures to redress any de facto discrimination.  Educational data should be disaggregated bythe prohibited grounds of discrimination.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 9
Academic freedom and institutional autonomy16
38. In the light of its examination of numerous States parties’ reports, the Committee has
formed the view that the right to education can only be enjoyed if accompanied by the academicfreedom of staff and students.  Accordingly, even though the issue is not explicitly mentioned in
article 13, it is appropriate and necessary for the Committee to make some observations about
academic freedom.  The following remarks give particular attention to institutions of highereducation because, in the Committee’s experience, staff and students in higher education areespecially vulnerable to political and other pressures which undermine academic freedom.  TheCommittee wishes to emphasize, however, that staff and students throughout the educationsector are entitled to academic freedom and many of the following observations have generalapplication.
39. Members of the academic community, individually or collectively, are free to pursue,
develop and transmit knowledge and ideas, through research, teaching, study, discussion,documentation, production, creation or writing.  Academic freedom includes the liberty ofindividuals to express freely opinions about the institution or system in which they work, to fulfiltheir functions without discrimination or fear of repression by the State or any other actor, toparticipate in professsional or representative academic bodies, and to enjoy all the internationallyrecognized human rights applicable to other individuals in the same jurisdiction.  The enjoymentof academic freedom carries with it obligations, such as the duty to respect the academicfreedom of others, to ensure the fair discussion of contrary views, and to treat all withoutdiscrimination on any of the prohibited grounds.
40. The enjoyment of academic freedom requires the autonomy of institutions of higher
education.  Autonomy is that degree of self-governance necessary for effective decision-makingby institutions of higher education in relation to their academic work, standards, managementand related activities.  Self-governance, however, must be consistent with systems of publicaccountability, especially in respect of funding provided by the State.  Given the substantialpublic investments made in higher education, an appropriate balance has to be struck betweeninstitutional autonomy and accountability.  While there is no single model, institutionalarrangements should be fair, just and equitable, and as transparent and participatory as possible.
Discipline in schools
17
41. In the Committee’s view, corporal punishment is inconsistent with the fundamental
guiding principle of international human rights law enshrined in the Preambles to the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights and both Covenants:  the dignity of the individual.
18  Other aspects
of school discipline may also be inconsistent with human dignity, such as public humiliation.Nor should any form of discipline breach other rights under the Covenant, such as the right tofood.  A State party is required to take measures to ensure that discipline which is inconsistentwith the Covenant does not occur in any public or private educational institution within itsjurisdiction.  The Committee welcomes initiatives taken by some States parties which activelyencourage schools to introduce “positive”, non-violent approaches to school discipline.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 10
Limitations on article 13
42. The Committee wishes to emphasize that the Covenant's limitations clause, article 4, is
primarily intended to be protective of the rights of individuals rather than permissive of theimposition of limitations by the State.  Consequently, a State party which closes a university or
other educational institution on grounds such as national security or the preservation of public
order has the burden of justifying such a serious measure in relation to each of the elementsidentified in article 4.
II.  STATES PARTIES' OBLIGATIONS AND VIOLATIONS
General legal obligations
43. While the Covenant provides for progressive realization and acknowledges the
constraints due to the limits of available resources, it also imposes on States parties variousobligations which are of immediate effect.
19  States parties have immediate obligations in
relation to the right to education, such as the “guarantee” that the right “will be exercised withoutdiscrimination of any kind” (art.2 (2)) and the obligation “to take steps” (art. 2 (1)) towards thefull realization of article 13.
20  Such steps must be “deliberate, concrete and targeted” towards
the full realization of the right to education.
44. The realization of the right to education over time, that is “progressively”, should not be
interpreted as depriving States parties’ obligations of all meaningful content.  Progressiverealization means that States parties have a specific and continuing obligation “to move asexpeditiously and effectively as possible” towards the full realization of article 13.
21
45. There is a strong presumption of impermissibility of any retrogressive measures taken inrelation to the right to education, as well as other rights enunciated in the Covenant.  If anydeliberately retrogressive measures are taken, the State party has the burden of proving that theyhave been introduced after the most careful consideration of all alternatives and that they arefully justified by reference to the totality of the rights provided for in the Covenant and in thecontext of the full use of the State party’s maximum available resources.
22
46. The right to education, like all human rights, imposes three types or levels of obligationson States parties:  the obligations to respect, protect and fulfil.  In turn, the obligation to fulfilincorporates both an obligation to facilitate and an obligation to provide.
47. The obligation to respect requires States parties to avoid measures that hinder or prevent
the enjoyment of the right to education.  The obligation to protect requires States parties to takemeasures that prevent third parties from interfering with the enjoyment of the right to education.The obligation to fulfil (facilitate) requires States to take positive measures that enable and assistindividuals and communities to enjoy the right to education.  Finally, States parties have anobligation to fulfil (provide) the right to education.  As a general rule, States parties are obligedto fulfil (provide) a specific right in the Covenant when an individual or group is unable, forreasons beyond their control, to realize the right themselves by the means at their disposal.However, the extent of this obligation is always subject to the text of the Covenant.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 11
48. In this respect, two features of article 13 require emphasis.  First, it is clear that article 13
regards States as having principal responsibility for the direct provision of education in mostcircumstances; States parties recognize, for example, that the “development of a system ofschools at all levels shall be actively pursued” (art. 13 (2) (e)).  Secondly, given the differentialwording of article 13 (2) in relation to primary, secondary, higher and fundamental education,
the parameters of a State party's obligation to fulfil (provide) are not the same for all levels of
education.  Accordingly, in light of the text of the Covenant, States parties have an enhancedobligation to fulfil (provide) regarding the right to education, but the extent of this obligation isnot uniform for all levels of education.  The Committee observes that this interpretation of theobligation to fulfil (provide) in relation to article 13 coincides with the law and practice ofnumerous States parties.
Specific legal obligations
49. States parties are required to ensure that curricula, for all levels of the educational
system, are directed to the objectives identified in article 13 (1). 23  They are also obliged to
establish and maintain a transparent and effective system which monitors whether or noteducation is, in fact, directed to the educational objectives set out in article 13 (1).
50. In relation to article 13 (2), States have obligations to respect, protect and fulfil each of
the “essential features” (availability, accessibility, acceptability, adaptability) of the right toeducation.  By way of illustration, a State must respect the availability of education by notclosing private schools; protect the accessibility of education by ensuring that third parties,including parents and employers, do not stop girls from going to school; fulfil (facilitate) theacceptability of education by taking positive measures to ensure that education is culturallyappropriate for minorities and indigenous peoples, and of good quality for all; fulfil (provide) theadaptability of education by designing and providing resources for curricula which reflect thecontemporary needs of students in a changing world; and fulfil (provide) the availability ofeducation by actively developing a system of schools, including building classrooms, deliveringprogrammes, providing teaching materials, training teachers and paying them domesticallycompetitive salaries.
51. As already observed, the obligations of States parties in relation to primary, secondary,
higher and fundamental education are not identical.  Given the wording of article 13 (2), Statesparties are obliged to prioritize the introduction of compulsory, free primary education.
24  This
interpretation of article 13 (2) is reinforced by the priority accorded to primary education inarticle 14.  The obligation to provide primary education for all is an immediate duty of all Statesparties.
52. In relation to article 13 (2) (b)-(d), a State party has an immediate obligation “to take
steps” (art. 2 (1)) towards the realization of secondary, higher and fundamental education for allthose within its jurisdiction.  At a minimum, the State party is required to adopt and implement anational educational strategy which includes the provision of secondary, higher and fundamentaleducation in accordance with the Covenant.  This strategy should include mechanisms, such asindicators and benchmarks on the right to education, by which progress can be closelymonitored.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 12
53. Under article 13 (2) (e), States parties are obliged to ensure that an educational fellowship
system is in place to assist disadvantaged groups.25 The obligation to pursue actively the
“development of a system of schools at all levels” reinforces the principal responsibility ofStates parties to ensure the direct provision of the right to education in most circumstances.
26
54. States parties are obliged to establish “minimum educational standards” to which alleducational institutions established in accordance with article 13 (3) and (4) are required toconform.  They must also maintain a transparent and effective system to monitor such standards.A State party has no obligation to fund institutions established in accordance with article 13 (3)and (4); however, if a State elects to make a financial contribution to private educationalinstitutions, it must do so without discrimination on any of the prohibited grounds.
55. States parties have an obligation to ensure that communities and families are not
dependent on child labour.  The Committee especially affirms the importance of education ineliminating child labour and the obligations set out in article 7 (2) of the Worst Forms of ChildLabour Convention, 1999 (Convention No. 182).
27 Additionally, given article 2 (2), States
parties are obliged to remove gender and other stereotyping which impedes the educationalaccess of girls, women and other disadvantaged groups.
56. In its General Comment 3, the Committee drew attention to the obligation of all States
parties to take steps, “individually and through international assistance and cooperation,especially economic and technical”, towards the full realization of the rights recognized in theCovenant, such as the right to education.
28 Articles 2 (1) and 23 of the Covenant, Article 56 of
the Charter of the United Nations, article 10 of the World Declaration on Education for All, andPart I, paragraph 34 of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action all reinforce theobligation of States parties in relation to the provision of international assistance and cooperationfor the full realization of the right to education.  In relation to the negotiation and ratification ofinternational agreements, States parties should take steps to ensure that these instruments do notadversely impact upon the right to education.  Similarly, States parties have an obligation toensure that their actions as members of international organizations, including internationalfinancial institutions, take due account of the right to education.
57. In its General Comment 3, the Committee confirmed that States parties have “a minimum
core obligation to ensure the satisfaction of, at the very least, minimum essential levels” of eachof the rights enunciated in the Covenant, including “the most basic forms of education”.  In thecontext of article 13, this core includes an obligation:  to ensure the right of access to publiceducational institutions and programmes on a non-discriminatory basis; to ensure that educationconforms to the objectives set out in article 13 (1); to provide primary education for all inaccordance with article 13 (2) (a); to adopt and implement a national educational strategy whichincludes provision for secondary, higher and fundamental education; and to ensure free choice ofeducation without interference from the State or third parties, subject to conformity with“minimum educational standards” (art. 13 (3) and (4)).
Violations
58. When the normative content of article 13 (Part I) is applied to the general and specific
obligations of States parties (Part II), a dynamic process is set in motion which facilitates
E/C.12/1999/10
page 13
identification of violations of the right to education.  Violations of article 13 may occur through
the direct action of States parties (acts of commission) or through their failure to take stepsrequired by the Covenant (acts of omission).
59. By way of illustration, violations of article 13 include:  the introduction or failure to
repeal legislation which discriminates against individuals or groups, on any of the prohibited
grounds, in the field of education; the failure to take measures which address de factoeducational discrimination; the use of curricula inconsistent with the educational objectives setout in article 13 (1); the failure to maintain a transparent and effective system to monitorconformity with article 13 (1); the failure to introduce, as a matter of priority, primary educationwhich is compulsory and available free to all; the failure to take “deliberate, concrete andtargeted” measures towards the progressive realization of secondary, higher and fundamentaleducation in accordance with article 13 (2) (b)-(d); the prohibition of private educationalinstitutions; the failure to ensure private educational institutions conform to the “minimumeducational standards” required by article 13 (3) and (4); the denial of academic freedom of staffand students; the closure of educational institutions in times of political tension innon-conformity with article 4.
III.  OBLIGATIONS OF ACTORS OTHER THAN STATES PARTIES
60. Given article 22 of the Covenant, the role of the United Nations agencies, including at the
country level through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), is ofspecial importance in relation to the realization of article 13.  Coordinated efforts for therealization of the right to education should be maintained to improve coherence and interactionamong all the actors concerned, including the various components of civil society.  UNESCO,the United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF, ILO, the World Bank, the regionaldevelopment banks, the International Monetary Fund and other relevant bodies within theUnited Nations system should enhance their cooperation for the implementation of the right toeducation at the national level, with due respect to their specific mandates, and building on theirrespective expertise.  In particular, the international financial institutions, notably the WorldBank and IMF, should pay greater attention to the protection of the right to education in theirlending policies, credit agreements, structural adjustment programmes and measures taken inresponse to the debt crisis.
29  When examining the reports of States parties, the Committee will
consider the effects of the assistance provided by all actors other than States parties on the abilityof States to meet their obligations under article 13.  The adoption of a human rights-basedapproach by United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and bodies will greatly facilitateimplementation of the right to education.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 14
Notes
1  The World Declaration on Education for All was adopted by 155 governmental delegations;
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action was adopted by 171 governmentaldelegations; the Convention on the Rights of the Child has been ratified or acceded to by
191 States parties; the Plan of Action of the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education
was adopted by a consensus resolution of the General Assembly (49/184).
2  This approach corresponds with the Committee's analytical framework adopted in
relation to the rights to adequate housing and food, as well as the work of the United NationsSpecial Rapporteur on the right to education.  In its General Comment 4, the Committeeidentified a number of factors which bear upon the right to adequate housing, including“availability”, “affordability”, “accessibility” and “cultural adequacy”.  In its GeneralComment 12, the Committee identified elements of the right to adequate food, such as“availability”, “acceptability” and “accessibility”.  In her preliminary report to the Commissionon Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the right to education sets out “four essentialfeatures that primary schools should exhibit, namely availability, accessibility, acceptability andadaptability”, (E/CN.4/1999/49, para. 50).
3  See para. 6.
4  The Declaration defines “basic learning needs” as:  “essential learning tools (such as literacy,
oral expression, numeracy, and problem solving) and the basic learning content (such asknowledge, skills, values, and attitudes) required by human beings to be able to survive, todevelop their full capacities, to live and work in dignity, to participate fully in development, toimprove the quality of their lives, to make informed decisions, and to continue learning” (art. 1).
5  Advocacy Kit, Basic Education 1999 (UNICEF), section 1, page 1.
6  See para. 6.
7  See International Standard Classification of Education 1997, UNESCO, para. 52.
8  A view also reflected in the Human Resources Development Convention 1975
(Convention No. 142) and the Social Policy (Basic Aims and Standards) Convention 1962(Convention No. 117) of the International Labour Organization.
9  See note 8.
10  See para. 6.
11  See para. 15.
12  See para. 6.
13  See para. 9.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 15
14  This replicates article 18 (4) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and also relates to the freedom to teach a religion or belief as stated in article 18 (1)ICCPR.  (See Human Rights Committee General Comment 22 on article 18 ICCPR,forty-eighth session, 1993.)  The Human Rights Committee notes that the fundamental characterof article 18 ICCPR is reflected in the fact that this provision cannot be derogated from, even in
time of public emergency, as stated in article 4 (2) of that Covenant.
15  According to article 2:
“When permitted in a State, the following situations shall not be deemed to constitute
discrimination, within the meaning of article 1 of this Convention:
(a) The establishment or maintenance of separate educational systems or
institutions for pupils of the two sexes, if these systems or institutions offer equivalentaccess to education, provide a teaching staff with qualifications of the same standard aswell as school premises and equipment of the same quality, and afford the opportunity totake the same or equivalent courses of study;
(b) The establishment or maintenance, for religious or linguistic reasons, of
separate educational systems or institutions offering an education which is in keepingwith the wishes of the pupil’s parents or legal guardians, if participation in such systemsor attendance at such institutions is optional and if the education provided conforms tosuch standards as may be laid down or approved by the competent authorities, inparticular for education of the same level;
(c) The establishment or maintenance of private educational institutions, if the
object of the institutions is not to secure the exclusion of any group but to provideeducational facilities in addition to those provided by the public authorities, if theinstitutions are conducted in accordance with that object, and if the education providedconforms with such standards as may be laid down or approved by the competentauthorities, in particular for education of the same level.”
16   See UNESCO Recommendation Concerning the Status of Higher-Education Teaching
Personnel (1997).
17  In formulating this paragraph, the Committee has taken note of the practice evolving
elsewhere in the international human rights system, such as the interpretation given by theCommittee on the Rights of the Child to article 28 (2) of the Convention on the Rights of theChild, as well as the Human Rights Committee’s interpretation of article 7 of ICCPR.
18  The Committee notes that, although it is absent from article 26 (2) of the Declaration, the
drafters of ICESCR expressly included the dignity of the human personality as one of themandatory objectives to which all education is to be directed (art. 13 (1)).
19  See the Committee’s General Comment 3, para. 1.
20  See the Committee’s General Comment 3, para. 2.
E/C.12/1999/10
page 16
21  See the Committee’s General Comment 3, para. 9.
22  See the Committee’s General Comment 3, para. 9.
23  There are numerous resources to assist States parties in this regard, such as UNESCO’s
Guidelines for Curriculum and Textbook Development in International Education
(ED/ECS/HCI).  One of the objectives of article 13 (1) is to “strengthen the respect of humanrights and fundamental freedoms”; in this particular context, States parties should examine theinitiatives developed within the framework of the United Nations Decade for Human RightsEducation - especially instructive is the Plan of Action for the Decade, adopted by theGeneral Assembly in 1996, and the Guidelines for National Plans of Action for Human RightsEducation, developed by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to assist Statesin responding to the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education.
24  On the meaning of “compulsory” and “free”, see paragraphs 6 and 7 of General Comment 11
on article 14.
25  In appropriate cases, such a fellowship system would be an especially appropriate target for
the international assistance and cooperation anticipated by article 2 (1).
26  In the context of basic education, UNICEF has observed:  “Only the State … can pull together
all the components into a coherent but flexible education system”.  UNICEF, The State of the
World’s Children, 1999, “The education revolution”, p. 77.
27  According to article 7 (2), “(e)ach Member shall, taking into account the importance of
education in eliminating child labour, take effective and time-bound measures to:  (c) ensureaccess to free basic education, and, wherever possible and appropriate, vocational training, for allchildren removed from the worst forms of child labour” (ILO Convention 182, Worst Forms ofChild Labour, 1999).
28  See the Committee’s General Comment 3, paras. 13-14.
29  See the Committee’s General Comment 2, para. 9.
-----
