The right to freedom of association equally protects associations that 
are registered and unregistered. Individuals involved in unregistered 
associations should be free to carry out any lawful activities, including 
the right to hold and participate in peaceful assemblies, and should not 
be subject to criminal sanctions ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 14, para 56).
It doesn’t matter who you are. Article 22 of the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)  recognizes that the right to freedom 
of association should be enjoyed by everyone , as provided for by of the 
Covenant  itself (see Art. 2 on non-discrimination) and resolutions 15/21 , 
21/16  and 24/5  of the Human Rights Council. In resolution 24/5 , the 
Council reminded States of their obligation to respect and protect the rights 
of all individuals to assemble peacefully and associate freely, online as well as offline, including 
in the context of elections, and including persons espousing minority or dissenting views or 
beliefs seeking to exercise or to promote those rights ( A/HRC/26/29 , p 9, para 22). Legislation 
should not set any specific limitation on individuals, including children, foreign nationals, 
ethnic or linguistic minorities, LGBTI individuals, and women, to name a few ( A/HRC/20/27 , 
p 14, para 54; A/HRC/26/29 , p 6-7, para 18). The right to freedom of association also extends 
to legal entities, themselves (i.e., two associations which decide to form one organization).
States are obligated to take positive measures to establish and maintain 
an enabling environment for the operation of associations. Members 
of associations must be able to exercise their right to freedom of 
association without fear that they may be subjected to any threats, acts 
of intimidation or violence, including harassment, summary or arbitrary 
executions, arbitrary arrest or detention, torture, media smear campaigns, 
or travel bans ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 15-16, para 63). States also have an obligation not to unduly 
obstruct the exercise of the right to freedom of association. Members of associations should 
be free to determine their statutes, structure and activities and make decisions without 
State interference. Associations should enjoy, inter alia, the rights to express opinion, 
disseminate information, engage with the public and advocate before Governments and 
international bodies for human rights ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 16, para 64).The Right to Freedom of Association  
Best Practices Fact Sheet
What is an association?
An “association” refers to any group of individuals and/or any 
legal entities brought together in order to collectively act, express, 
promote, pursue or defend a field of common interest ( A/
HRC/20/27 , p 13, para 51). Some common types of associations 
include civil society organizations, clubs, cooperatives, NGOs, 
religious associations, political parties, trade unions, foundations and 
online associations ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 13, para 52).  
 
What is the right to freedom of association?
Stated simply, the right to freedom of association protects your 
right to form or join a group of like minded people to pursue 
common interests. The group may be formal or informal, and 
there is no requirement that the association be registered in order 
for freedom of association rights to apply ( A/HRC/20/27  p 14, 
para 56).  No more than two persons should be necessary to 
establish an association ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 14, para 54).  
 
Why is the right to freedom of association  
so important?
The right to freedom of association is among the most important 
human rights we possess. It is one of the core rights - along with 
freedom of peaceful assembly - designed to protect peoples’ 
ability to come together and work for the common good. It is a 
vehicle for the exercise of many other civil, cultural, economic, 
political and social rights ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 5, para 12). The 
right to freedom of association also plays a decisive role in the 
emergence and existence of effective democratic systems as they 
are a channel allowing for dialogue, pluralism, tolerance and 
broadmindedness, where minority or dissenting views or beliefs 
are respected ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 20, para 84). No
YesYes
http://www.freeassembly.net  • https://www.facebook.com/mainakiai.sr  • https://twitter.com/MainaKiai_UNSR  • https://www.flickr.com/photos/mainakiai  • official OHCHR siteUnited Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Maina Kiai (published Nov. 2014)Does the right to freedom of association apply to me?Does my association need to be registered?
Does the State have any obligation to promote association rights?  Can registration be required if I wish to form a legal entity?
It is acceptable to require some sort of registration in order to create 
an association that has its own legal personality, but it is vital that 
Government officials act in good faith and in a timely and non-selective 
manner. The Special Rapporteur considers as best practice procedures 
which are simple, non-onerous or even free of charge and expeditious 
(A/HRC/20/27 , p 14, para 57; A/HRC/RES/22/6 ). Registration should not 
be viewed as an exercise in asking permission. Thus, a “notification procedure” (rather 
than a “prior authorization procedure”) to establish an organization should be in force ( A/
HRC/20/27 , p 21, para. 95). Under a notification procedure, associations are automatically 
granted legal personality as soon as the authorities are notified by the founders that an 
organization was created. Still, notification should not a precondition for the existence of an 
association ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 15, para 58). Newly adopted laws should not require previously 
registered associations to re-register ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 15, para 62).Yes
Registration bodies must be bound to act immediately and laws should 
set short time limits to respond to submissions. During this period 
associations should be presumed to be operating legally until it is proven 
otherwise. Failure to provide a response within a clear and short time limit 
should result in a presumption that associations are operating legally ( A/
HRC/20/27 , p 15, para 60). Any decision rejecting the submission or application 
must be clearly motivated and duly communicated in writing to the applicant. Associations 
whose submissions have been rejected should have the opportunity to challenge the decision 
before an independent and impartial court ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 15, para 61).NoCan authorities delay my application indefinitely or reject it without telling me?
States should avoid measures that disproportionately target or burden 
civil society organizations, such as imposing onerous vetting rules, 
procedures or other association-specific requirements not applied to 
for-profit entities ( A/HRC/23/39 , p. 8, para. 24). Registration for an 
association, for example, should not be significantly more difficult or 
time-consuming than registration for a for-profit entity ( A/HRC/26/29/
Add.2 , p 14-15, paras 56-58). YesShould States treat associations and businesses equitably?
Electoral periods are a unique moment in the life of a nation to confirm, and 
even strengthen, democratic principles. In times of elections, the threshold 
for imposing restrictions should be higher than usual ( A/68/299 , p. 10, 
para. 25). Genuine elections cannot be achieved if the right to freedom of 
association is curtailed ( A/68/299 , p 20, para 56). Associations should have 
the freedom to engage in activities related to the electoral process, whether 
they are supportive of the Government or not ( A/68/299 , p 17, para 46). NoCore International Standards
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , Article 22:
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association with 
others, including the right to form and join trade unions for the 
protection of his interests.
2. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other 
than those which are prescribed by law and which are necessary 
in a democratic society in the interests of national security or 
public safety, public order (ordre public), the protection of public 
health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms 
of others. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful 
restrictions on members of the armed forces and of the police in 
their exercise of this right.
See also:
• Int’l Covenant on economic, social and cultural rights : article 8
• Universal Declaration of Human Rights : Article 20
• International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination : article 5(ix)
• Convention on the Rights of the Child : article 15
• Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities : article 29
• Declaration on Human Rights Defenders  (Declaration on the 
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of 
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms): article 5
• ILO conventions: No. 87 , No. 98 , No. 135
Key regional standards:
• African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights : Article 10
• African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child : Article 8 
• American Declaration on the Rights and Duties of Man : article 22
• American Convention on Human Rights : article 16
• European Convention on Human Rights : article 11
• Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union : article 12The Right to Freedom of Association
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Maina Kiai (published Nov. 2014)Combating fraud, embezzlement, money-laundering and other crime 
is a legitimate State interest, but it is not sufficient to simply pursue a 
legitimate interest. Limitations should also be prescribed by law and “be 
necessary” in a democratic society. Limitations must be proportionate 
to the interest to be protected and must be the least intrusive means to 
achieve the desired objective ( A/HRC/23/39 , p 8, para. 23; ICCPR , Art. 12).No
States have an obligation to establish accessible and effective complaints 
mechanisms that are able to independently, promptly and thoroughly 
investigate allegations of human rights violations or abuses, including 
those related to association rights ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 19, para 77). 
Where the right to freedom of association is unduly restricted, the 
victim(s) should have the rights to obtain redress and to fair and adequate 
compensation ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 19, para 81). YesThe ability for associations to seek, receive and use resources from domestic, 
foreign, and international sources is an integral and vital part of the right 
to freedom of association ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 17, para 67; A/HRC/23/39 , 
p 4, para 8). The term “resources” encompasses a broad concept that 
includes financial transfers, in-kind donations, material resources, human 
resources, and more ( A/HRC/23/39 , p 5, para. 10). The receipt of domestic 
or foreign funding should not be subject to the approval of the authorities ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 
17, para 68), and both registered and unregistered associations should have the freedom to 
seek and secure funding and resources from domestic, foreign, and international entities ( A/
HRC/20/27 , p 17, para 68). For more detailed information, please see the Special Rapporteur’s 
general principles on protecting civic space and the right to access resources , which was 
produced jointly with the Community of Democracies. YesDoes the right to freedom of association include the ability to access resources? Is combating crime, in and of itself, a legitimate reason to limit association rights?
Can authorities place special limits on association rights during election periods? 
Am I entitled to an effective remedy if my association rights are violated?Authorities must refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of an 
association and respect associations’ right to privacy, as stipulated in 
article 17 of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  (A/HRC/20/27 , p 
16, para 65). Authorities should not be entitled to: condition decisions 
and activities of the association; reverse the election of board members; 
condition board members’ decisions on the presence of a Government 
representative; request associations to submit reports in advance of publication; or 
request that organizations submit workplans for approval ( Id.). Independent bodies have 
a right to examine the associations’ records as a mechanism to ensure transparency and 
accountability, but such a procedure should not be arbitrary and must respect the principle 
of non-discrimination and the right to privacy ( Id.).Can authorities interfere in the internal affairs of an association?Best Practices Fact Sheet - page 2
States have an obligation to respect and fully protect association 
rights online as well as offline ( HRC Resolution 24/5 ). The Internet, in 
particular social media, and other information and communication 
technology, are important tools to facilitate the right to freedom of 
association in the real world. People also have the right to associate in 
virtual spaces, to gather online in order to express their opinions ( HRC 
Resolution 21/16 ). All States should ensure that Internet access is maintained at all times, 
including during times of political unrest ( A/HRC/17/27 , para. 79). Any determination to 
block online content must be undertaken by a competent judicial authority or a body which 
is independent of any political, commercial, or other unwarranted influences ( Id.).YesDoes the right to freedom association apply online?  
If an association fails to comply with its reporting obligations, such 
minor violation of the law should not lead to the closure of the 
association or criminal prosecution of its representative; rather, the 
association should be requested to promptly rectify its situation ( A/
HRC/23/39 , p 12, para. 38). Suspension and involuntarily dissolution of 
an association should only be possible when there is a clear and imminent 
danger resulting in a flagrant violation of national law, in compliance with international 
human rights law. Such measures should also be proportional to the legitimate aim 
pursued and used only when softer measures would be insufficient  ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 
18, para 75). Further, such drastic measures should be taken only by independent and 
impartial courts ( A/HRC/20/27 , p 18, para 76). NoCan an association be suspended or dissolved for failure to comply with its reporting 
obligations or a minor violation of the law?
http://www.freeassembly.net  • https://www.facebook.com/mainakiai.sr  • https://twitter.com/MainaKiai_UNSR  • https://www.flickr.com/photos/mainakiai  • official OHCHR siteNo
