International standards on Freedom of Expression  
Universal Declaration of Human Rights  
Article 19  
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions 
without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and 
regardless of frontiers.  
International Covenant on Ci vil and Politica l Rights (ICCPR)  
Article 19  
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.  
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, 
receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, reg ardless of frontiers, either orally, in 
writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.  
3. The exercise of the rights provided for n paragraph 3 of this article carries with it special duties 
and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be 
such as are provided by law and are necessary:  
(a) For resp ect of the right or reputations of others;  
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order, or of public health or morals.  
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights  
Article 9  
1. Every individual shall have the right to receive information.  
2. Every individual shall have the right to express and disseminate his opinions within the law.  
Resolution 169 on Repealing Criminal Defamation Law in Africa by the African Commission on Human 
and Peoples’ Rights -  24 November 2010 
1. Underlines  that criminal defamation laws constitute a serious interference with freedom of 
expression and impedes on the role of the media as a watchdog, preventing journalists and media practitioners to practice their profession without fear and in good faith;  
2. Commending States Parties to the African Charter (States Parties) that do not have, or have 
completely repealed insult and criminal defamation laws;  
(a) Calls  on States Parties to repeal criminal defamation laws or insult laws which impede 
freedom of speech, and to adhere to the provisions of freedom of expression, articulated in 
the African Charter, the Declaration, and other regional and international instruments;  
(b) Also calls  on States Parties to refrain from imposing general restrictions that are in violation 
of the right to freedom of expression;  
 
 
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  
Article 10  
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions 
and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and 
regardless of frontiers. This article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of 
broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.  
2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary 
in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, 
for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection 
of the reputatio n or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in 
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary  
American Convention on Human Rights  
Article 13  
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought and expression. This right includes freedom to seek, 
receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing, in print, in the form of art, or through any other medium of one’s choice.  
2. The exercise of the righ t provided for in the foregoing paragraph shall not be subject to prior 
censorship but shall be subject to subsequent imposition of liability, which shall be expressly 
established by law to the extent necessary to ensure:  
(a) Respect for the rights or rep utations of others;  
(b) The protection of national security, public order, or public health or morals.  
3. The right of expression may not be restricted by indirect methods or means,  such as the abuse of 
government or private controls over newsprint, radio b roadcasting frequencies, or equipment 
used in the dissemination of information, or by any other means tending to impede the communication and circulation of ideas and opinions.  
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 above, public entertainments may  be subject by 
law to prior censorship for the sole purpose of regulating access to them for the moral protection 
of childhood and adolescence.  
5. Any propaganda for war and any advocacy of national, racial, or religious hatred that constitute 
incitements to  lawless violence or to any other similar action against any person or group of 
persons on any grounds including those of race, colour, religion, language, or national origin shall 
be considered as offenses punishable by law.  
ASEAN Human Rights Declaration 
There is no established regional human rights body for Asia. However, the ten countries of the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) formally established the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on 
Human Rights (AICHR) on 23 October 2009, during th e 15th ASEAN Summit. The group also adopted a 
Human Rights Declaration, which guarantees freedom of expression as follows: 23. Every person has the 
right to freedom of opinion and expression, including freedom to hold opinions without interference and 
to seek, receive and impart information, whether orally, in writing or through any other medium of that 
person’s choice.  
