Women’s 
Rights are 
Human  
Rights
Women’s Rights are Human RightsDesigned and Printed at United Nations, Geneva
1404379 (E) – November 2014 – 3,350 – HR/PUB/14/2
United Nations publication
Sales No. E.14.XIV.5  
ISBN 978-92-1-154206-2                                    

i
i
New York and Geneva, 2014
Women’s  
Rights are  
Human  
Rights
WOMEN’S RiGHTS ARE HUMAN RiGHTS
NOTE
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of 
such a figure indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
HR/PUB/14/2
UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION
SALES NO. E.14.XIV.5
ISBN 978-92-1-154206-6
E-ISBN 978-92-1-056789-3
© 2014 UNITED NATIONS
ALL WORLDWIDE RIGHTS RESERVED
iii
iii
CONTENTS
iNTRODUCTiON  .........................................................................  1
i. PROTECTiON OF THE HUMAN RiGHTS OF WOMEN UNDER  
iNTERNATiONAL LAW  ............................................................  3
A. International human rights instruments  ...............................  4
B. Regional instruments  ........................................................  7
ii. GLOBAL COMMiTMENTS ........................................................  11
A. Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action  ....................  12
B. International Conference on Population and Development  .... 12
C. Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action  ........................  13
D. Millennium Development Goals  ........................................  14
E. United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development  ..... 15
iii. UNiTED NATiONS BODiES  ......................................................  19
A. The Human Rights Council and its mechanisms  ...................  19
B. The Security Council  ........................................................  21
C. The Commission on the Status of Women  ...........................  21
iV. KEY CONCEPTS  .....................................................................  25
A. The public-private divide  ..................................................  26
B. Universality of human rights  .............................................  27
C. Non-discrimination and equality between women and men  .. 29
D. Equality and equity  .........................................................  33
E. Gender  ..........................................................................  35
F. Intersectionality and multiple forms of discrimination ............  37
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTSiV
V. THE HUMAN RiGHTS FRAMEWORK iN PRACTiCE  ....................  41
A. Women’s rights in public and political life  ..........................  43
B. Sexual and reproductive health and rights  .........................  50
C. Women’s right to an adequate standard of living  ................  62
D. Violence against women  ..................................................  73
E. Impact of migration and displacement on the enjoyment of 
women’s rights  ...............................................................  86
F. Women’s human rights in conflicts and crises  ....................  92
G. Women’s access to justice  ................................................  109
1
1
iNTRODUCTiON
Attaining equality between women and men and eliminating all forms 
of discrimination against women are fundamental human rights and 
United Nations values. Women around the world nevertheless regularly 
suffer violations of their human rights throughout their lives, and realizing 
women’s human rights has not always been a priority. Achieving equality 
between women and men requires a comprehensive understanding of the 
ways in which women experience discrimination and are denied equality 
so as to develop appropriate strategies to eliminate such discrimination. 
The United Nations has a long history of addressing women’s human 
rights and much progress has been made in securing women’s rights 
across the world in recent decades. However, important gaps remain and 
women’s realities are constantly changing, with new manifestations of 
discrimination against them regularly emerging. Some groups of women 
face additional forms of discrimination based on their age, ethnicity, 
nationality, religion, health status, marital status, education, disability and 
socioeconomic status, among other grounds. These intersecting forms of 
discrimination must be taken into account when developing measures and 
responses to combat discrimination against women. 
This publication provides an introduction to women’s human rights, 
beginning with the main provisions in international human rights law and 
going on to explain particularly relevant concepts for fully understanding 
women’s human rights. Finally, selected areas of women’s human rights are 
examined together with information on the main work of United Nations 
human rights mechanisms and others pertaining to these topics. The aim 
of the publication is to offer a basic understanding of the human rights of 
women as a whole, but because of the wide variety of issues relevant to 
women’s human rights, it should not be considered exhaustive. 

3
i. 
Protection of  
the human rights 
of women under  
international law
Since the founding of the United Nations, equality between men and 
women has been among the most fundamental guarantees of human 
rights. Adopted in 1945, the Charter of the United Nations sets out as 
one of its goals “to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the 
dignity and worth of the human person, [and] in the equal rights of men 
and women”. Furthermore, Article 1 of the Charter stipulates that one of 
the purposes of the United Nations is to promote respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms “without distinction as to race, sex, language 
or religion”. This prohibition of discrimination based on sex is repeated in 
its Articles 13 (mandate of the General Assembly) and 55 (promotion of 
universal human rights). 
In 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted. It, 
too, proclaimed the equal entitlements of women and men to the rights 
contained in it, “without distinction of any kind, such as ... sex, ….” In 
drafting the Declaration, there was considerable discussion about the use 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS4
of the term “all men” rather than a gender-neutral term.1 The Declaration 
was eventually adopted using the terms “all human beings” and “everyone” 
in order to leave no doubt that the Universal Declaration was intended for 
everyone, men and women alike. 
A. iNTERNATiONAL HUMAN RiGHTS iNSTRUMENTS
After the adoption of the Universal Declaration, the Commission on Human 
Rights began drafting two human rights treaties, the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights. Together with the Universal Declaration, these 
make up the International Bill of Human Rights. The provisions of the two 
Covenants, as well as other human rights treaties, are legally binding on 
the States that ratify or accede to them. States that ratify these treaties 
periodically report to bodies of experts, which issue recommendations 
on the steps required to meet the obligations laid out in the treaties. 
These treaty-monitoring bodies also provide authoritative interpretations 
of the treaties and, if States have agreed, they also consider individual 
complaints of alleged violations.2
Both Covenants use the same wording to prohibit discrimination based 
on, inter alia, sex (art. 2), as well as to ensure the equal right of men 
and women to the enjoyment of all rights contained in them (art. 3). The 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights guarantees, among 
other rights, the right to life, freedom from torture, freedom from slavery, 
the right to liberty and security of the person, rights relating to due process 
in criminal and legal proceedings, equality before the law, freedom of 
movement, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of 
association, rights relating to family life and children, rights relating to 
citizenship and political participation, and minority groups’ rights to their 
culture, religion and language. The International Covenant on Economic, 
1  Johannes Morsink, “Women’s rights in the Universal Declaration”, Human Rights 
Quarterly , vol. 13, No. 2 (May 1991).
2  For more information on the human rights treaty system, see OHCHR, Fact Sheet No. 30:  
The United Nations Human Rights Treaty System  and OHCHR, Fact Sheet No. 7: 
Individual Complaint Procedures under the United Nations Human Rights Treaties .
5
I. PROTECTION OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF WOMEN UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
Social and Cultural Rights guarantees, for instance, the right to work, the 
right to form trade unions, rights relating to marriage, maternity and child 
protection, the right to an adequate standard of living, the right to health, 
the right to education, and rights relating to culture and science. 
In 1967, United Nations Member States adopted the Declaration on 
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which states that 
discrimination against women is an offence against human dignity and 
calls on States to “abolish existing laws, customs, regulations and practices 
which are discriminatory against women, and to establish adequate legal 
protection for equal rights of men and women”. Less than a year later 
a proposal for a legally binding treaty on women’s rights was made. 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women was adopted by the General Assembly in 1979. Its preamble 
explains that, despite the existence of other instruments, women still do not 
enjoy equal rights with men. 
The Convention articulates the nature and meaning of sex-based 
discrimination, and lays out State obligations to eliminate discrimination 
and achieve substantive equality. As with all human rights treaties, only 
States incur obligations through ratification. However, the Convention 
articulates State obligations to address not only discriminatory laws, but 
also practices and customs, and discrimination against women by private 
actors. 
With these general principles as an overarching framework, the specific 
obligations of States to eliminate discrimination against women in political, 
social, economic and cultural fields are laid out in 16 substantive articles. 
The Convention covers both civil and political rights (rights to vote, to 
participate in public life, to acquire, change or retain one’s nationality, 
equality before the law and freedom of movement) and economic, social 
and cultural rights (rights to education, work, health and financial credit). 
The Convention also pays specific attention to particular phenomena such 
as trafficking, to certain groups of women, for instance rural women, and 
to specific matters where there are special risks to women’s full enjoyment 
of their human rights, for example marriage and the family. 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS6
The Convention defines discrimination in its article 1 as “… any distinction, 
exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or 
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise 
by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men 
and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, 
economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field.” 
Such discrimination encompasses any difference in treatment on the 
grounds of sex which:
• Intentionally or unintentionally disadvantages women;
• Prevents society as a whole from recognizing women’s rights in 
both the private and the public spheres; 
• Prevents women from exercising the human rights and fundamental 
freedoms to which they are entitled. 
The Convention also specifies the different ways in which State parties 
are to eliminate discrimination, such as through appropriate legislation 
prohibiting discrimination, ensuring the legal protection of women’s 
rights, refraining from discriminatory actions, protecting women against 
discrimination by any person, organization or enterprise, and modifying 
or abolishing discriminatory legislation, regulations and penal provisions. 
The Convention foresees that achieving equality may require positive 
action on the part of the State to improve the status of women. To accelerate 
women’s actual equality in all spheres of life, States are permitted to use 
temporary special measures for as long as inequalities continue to exist. 
The Convention thus reaches beyond the narrow concept of formal equality 
and aims for equality of opportunity and equality of outcome. Temporary 
special measures are both lawful and necessary to achieve these goals. In 
principle, these measures should be removed once equal status has been 
achieved. 
Importantly, the Convention adds new, substantive provisions to the other 
instruments which also deal with equality and non-discrimination. Article 
5 establishes that in addition to recognizing women’s legal equality and 
promoting their de facto equality, States should also strive to eliminate the 
7
I. PROTECTION OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF WOMEN UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
social, cultural and traditional patterns that perpetuate harmful gender 
stereotypes and to create an overall framework in society that promotes 
the realization of women’s full rights.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (art. 2) and the Convention on 
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their 
Families (art. 7) also prohibit discrimination based on sex. The Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (art. 6) recognizes the multiple 
discrimination that women with disabilities are subjected to, and requires 
State parties to address this by taking “all appropriate measures to ensure 
the full development, advancement and empowerment of women” in 
the enjoyment of their human rights. In its general recommendation No. 
25 (2000) on gender-related dimensions of racial discrimination, the 
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which oversees 
compliance with the International Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Racial Discrimination, also recognized the gender dimensions 
of racial discrimination and said it would “endeavour in its work to take 
into account gender factors or issues which may be interlinked with 
racial discrimination.” The Committee against Torture, which monitors 
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment, also regularly addresses issues of violence 
against women and girls.
B. REGiONAL iNSTRUMENTS
In addition to international human rights standards, regional human rights 
treaties, too, include crucial provisions aimed at promoting and protecting 
women’s human rights.3
3  Regional human rights treaties also have oversight mechanisms to assess compliance 
with their provisions by the States that have ratified them. These include the African 
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the Inter-American Commission on Human 
Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the Council of Europe and the 
European Court of Human Rights. Some of their work is highlighted in this publication.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS8
The African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights was adopted 
in 1981 by the Organization of African Unity. Its article 2 prohibits 
discrimination on any grounds, including sex, in the enjoyment of the rights 
guaranteed by the Charter. Article 18 specifically mentions the obligation 
of African States to “ensure the elimination of every discrimination against 
women and also ensure the protection of the rights of the woman and 
the child as stipulated in international declarations and conventions”. The 
Charter’s Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) 
was adopted in 2003. 
The Charter of the Organization of American States includes a non-
discrimination provision in its chapter II, article 3 (l), and the American 
Convention on Human Rights in its article 1. Moreover, in 1994 the 
Organization adopted the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, 
Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (Belém do Pará 
Convention). 
The European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 
prohibits discrimination on any grounds, including sex, in the enjoyment 
of rights contained in the Convention (art. 14). Since 1998 individuals 
can bring complaints to the European Court of Human Rights based on 
allegations of violations of the Convention. In 2011 the Council of Europe 
adopted a new Convention on preventing and combating violence against 
women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).
Regional political organizations, including the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, 
the Economic Community of West African States and the Southern African 
Development Community, have also adopted protocols and resolutions 
and issued declarations pertaining to women’s human rights. 


11
ii.
Global 
commitments
Women’s rights have been at the heart of a series of international 
conferences that have produced significant political commitments to 
women’s human rights and equality. Starting in 1975, which was also 
International Women’s Year, Mexico City hosted the World Conference 
on the International Women’s Year, which resulted in the World Plan of 
Action and the designation of 1975–1985 as the United Nations Decade 
for Women. In 1980, another international conference on women was 
held in Copenhagen and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women was opened for signature. The third World 
Conference on Women was held in Nairobi, with the Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women having begun its work in 
1982. These three world conferences witnessed extraordinary activism 
on the part of women from around the world and laid the groundwork for 
the world conferences in the 1990s to address women’s rights, including 
the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995 (see 
below). In addition, the rights of women belonging to particular groups, 
such as older women, ethnic minority women or women with disabilities, 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS12
have been also addressed in various other international policy documents 
such as the International Plans of Action on Ageing (Vienna, 1982 and 
Madrid, 2002), the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (2001) 
and the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons (1982). 
A. ViENNA DECLARATiON AND PROGRAMME OF ACTiON4
In 1993, the World Conference on Human Rights was held in Vienna. It 
sought to review the status of the human rights machinery in place at the 
time. Women’s rights activists mobilized to ensure that women’s human 
rights were fully on the agenda of the international community under the 
rallying cry “Women’s Rights are Human Rights.” Particularly around the 
issue of violence against women, civil society activists organized tribunals 
to put the spotlight on violations of women’s rights, previously unaddressed 
because they were considered part of the private sphere, taboo or simply 
accepted as an inevitable part of women’s lives. The Conference was 
successful in adopting the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 
which stated that “the human rights of women and of the girl-child are an 
inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights” (para. 
18) and placed particularly heavy emphasis on eliminating all forms of 
gender-based violence. Importantly, the Programme of Action also called 
for “the eradication of any conflicts which may arise between the rights 
of women and the harmful effects of certain traditional or customary 
practices, cultural prejudices and religious extremism” (para. 38).
B. iNTERNATiONAL CONFERENCE ON POPULATiON AND 
DEVELOPMENT
The International Conference on Population and Development, which 
was held in 1994, represented a milestone for women’s rights. While the 
Conference was focused on population issues, the delegates meeting in 
Cairo agreed that population was not only about demographics but, more 
4  A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
13
II. GLOBAL COMMITMENTS
importantly, about people. The issues taken up in its Programme of Action5 
are fundamentally related to women’s human rights, including gender 
equality, the family, reproductive health, birth control and family planning, 
women’s health, as well as immigration and education of women. 
Importantly, the Programme of Action is explicitly grounded in human 
rights and proclaims that “advancing gender equality and equity and 
the empowerment of women, and the elimination of all kinds of violence 
against women, and ensuring women’s ability to control their own fertility, 
are cornerstones of population and development-related programmes.” 
The Conference was also important for its clear statement of reproductive 
rights, explaining that these “rest on the recognition of the basic right of 
all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, 
spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and 
means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual 
and reproductive health. It also includes their right to make decisions 
concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence, as 
expressed in human rights documents.” 
The Programme of Action sets specific targets for: the provision of 
universal education; the reduction of infant, child and maternal mortality; 
and ensuring universal access to reproductive health care, including 
family planning, assisted childbirth and prevention of sexually transmitted 
infections, including HIV/AIDS, by 2015. Follow-up conferences have 
been organized to assess progress towards these goals, and inequality and 
lack of accountability constitute ongoing challenges to their achievement.
C. BEiJiNG DECLARATiON AND PLATFORM FOR ACTiON6
Adopted during the Fourth World Conference on Women in September 
1995, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action focused on 12 
areas concerning the implementation of women’s human rights and 
5  Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 
1994  (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6  Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995  (United 
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS14
set out an agenda for women’s empowerment. It builds on the results 
of the previous three world conferences on women, but is considered a 
significant achievement in explicitly articulating women’s rights as human 
rights. The Platform for Action includes a series of strategic objectives to 
eliminate discrimination against women and achieve equality between 
women and men. It involves political and legal strategies on a global scale 
based on a human rights framework. The Platform for Action is the most 
comprehensive expression of States’ commitments to the human rights of 
women. 
Subsequent reviews of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action have revealed that although significant progress has 
been made in some areas of women’s human rights, “discriminatory 
legislation as well as harmful traditional and customary practices and 
negative stereotyping of women and men still persist” particularly in family, 
civil, penal, labour and commercial laws or codes, or administrative rules 
and regulations.7 Both the 2005 and the 2010 reviews of the Platform 
concluded that de jure and de facto equality had not been achieved in 
any country in the world and the 2010 review recognized that even where 
legal reforms had taken place, they were often ineffectively enforced.8
D. MiLLENNiUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
In 2000, the international community agreed to eight time-bound 
development goals to be achieved by 2015, including a goal on 
gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as one on the 
reduction of maternal mortality. Seven of the Goals have specific targets to 
measure progress. Although they have shortcomings from a human rights 
perspective, the Millennium Development Goals are an important political 
commitment which has galvanized international support for some of the 
world’s most daunting problems. 
7  General Assembly resolution S-23/3, annex, para. 27.
8  E/2010/4–E/CN.6/2010/02, paras. 307–310.
15
II. GLOBAL COMMITMENTS
With respect to women’s rights, Millennium Development Goal 3 
is to promote gender equality and empower women. However, its 
corresponding target relates only to eliminating gender disparities in 
education by 2015. While girls’ access to education is imperative for 
achieving gender equality, this narrow target is insufficient for measuring 
progress on achieving gender equality and empowering women. Goal 3 
also includes indicators on the share of women in wage employment in the 
non-agricultural sector and in national parliaments, but these do not have 
benchmarks or deadlines. Critical issues such as violence against women 
and discriminatory laws are not addressed. 
Millennium Development Goal 5 aims to reduce the maternal mortality ratio 
by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015. Unfortunately, at the 2010 
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium 
Development Goals, it was revealed to be the most off track of all of the 
Goals, despite the fact that the knowledge and the tools are available to 
make pregnancy and childbirth a safe experience for women. In 2010, 
the Secretary-General launched the Global Strategy for Women’s and 
Children’s Health, setting out key actions to improve the health of women 
and children worldwide. 
Integrating human rights and gender equality throughout the Millennium 
Development Goals and in the post-2015 development agenda are key to 
achieving meaningful progress. 
E. UNiTED NATiONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAiNABLE DEVELOPMENT
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (“Rio+20”) 
brought Heads of State and Government to Brazil in 2012, to appraise 
progress in the implementation of agreements struck since the landmark 
1992 United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development in 
Rio de Janeiro. At “Rio+20”, countries renewed their political commitment 
to sustainable development, agreed to establish a set of sustainable 
development goals and established a high-level political forum on 
sustainable development. Importantly, the outcome document, entitled “The 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS16
future we want”,9 also reaffirms the commitments of States to “women’s 
equal rights, access and opportunities for participation and leadership 
in the economy, society and political decision-making” and includes 
explicit references to accelerating the implementation of commitments in 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women, the Beijing Platform for Action and the Millennium Declaration. 
The outcome document also states that “gender equality and the effective 
participation of women are important for effective action on all aspects of 
sustainable development” and calls for the repeal of discriminatory laws 
and for ensuring women’s equal access to justice.
9  General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex.


19
iii.
United Nations 
bodies
A. THE HUMAN RiGHTS COUNCiL AND iTS MECHANiSMS
The Human Rights Council is the main intergovernmental body of the 
United Nations to promote and protect human rights. With 47 States 
elected by the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council has regularly 
held special panels on women’s rights and the integration of a gender 
perspective since its creation in 2006. There are also many resolutions by 
the Council and its predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights, that 
call on States to implement their obligations relating to women’s rights. 
These discussions and resolutions are important to keep women’s rights on 
the international agenda. 
The Human Rights Council also has the power to call special sessions to 
address human rights violations and emergencies. These special sessions 
have, in some cases, presented opportunities for examining violations of 
women’s rights. For instance, the special session on Darfur, Sudan, led to 
a report of the High-level Mission on the situation of human rights there 
in which specific concerns were raised about rape and sexual violence, 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS20
20
and the lack of access to justice for these crimes (A/HRC/4/80, para. 
39). The special session on the Democratic Republic of the Congo also 
led to reports on the situation there which expressed particular concern 
about sexual violence and gender inequality (A/HRC/10/59, paras. 
35–42, and A/HRC/13/63, paras. 26–34). Furthermore, the Human 
Rights Council recently established Commissions of Inquiry for Libya and 
for the Syrian Arab Republic, to investigate the violations of international 
humanitarian law and human rights law by all parties to the conflict that 
have taken place there during civil strife starting in both countries in 2011. 
Many commissions of inquiry involve an expert on sexual and gender-
based violence, and their reports include findings on gender-based 
violence and recommendations on gender aspects of accountability and 
transitional justice (A/HRC/19/68 and A/HRC/19/69).
The universal periodic review (UPR), a procedure established at the 
creation of the Council, also presents important opportunities for assessing 
States’ compliance with their international obligations related to the human 
rights of women. Under this mechanism, the human rights situation in all 
United Nations Member States is reviewed every four and a half years. 
Women’s rights are among the most frequently raised issues in the UPR 
recommendations. 
Special procedures mandate holders are appointed by the Human Rights 
Council to examine particular thematic issues or the human rights situation 
in a certain country.10 They undertake thematic research, conduct country 
missions, engage in dialogue with Governments about individual cases 
or broader structural concerns, engage in advocacy and contribute to 
the development of international human rights law. Certain special 
procedures mandates are specifically concerned with women’s rights, 
such as the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes 
and consequences, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, 
especially women and children, and the Working Group on the issue of 
discrimination against women in law and in practice. Other mandates 
10  More information about special procedures is available from www.ohchr.org/EN/
HRBodies/SP/Pages/Welcomepage.aspx (accessed 29 November 2013).
21
III. UNITED NATIONS BODIES21
have devoted attention to women’s rights and gender in their work, 
particularly in undertaking thematic research on women and specific 
human rights, ensuring attention to women’s rights in their country visits, 
and communicating with Governments on specific cases of alleged 
violations of women’s human rights. 
The work of special procedures mandate holders helps to improve 
understanding of international human rights law, reflecting evolving 
interpretations to better take account of women’s experience and denials of 
their human rights. Various examples of these contributions are highlighted 
below.
B. THE SECURiTY COUNCiL
The United Nations Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions 
specifically relating to women, peace and security. In 2000, the Security 
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1325, calling for increased 
participation of women in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution 
and a gender perspective in all United Nations peace and security efforts, 
as well as in the negotiation and implementation of peace agreements. 
Resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent Security Council resolutions and 
United Nations Secretary-General reports on the same topic also call on 
all parties to conflicts to take special measures to protect women and girls 
from gender-based violence in the context of armed conflict, while at the 
same time recognizing women’s important role in peace processes as 
agents of change.11
C. THE COMMiSSiON ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN
The Commission on the Status of Women was established by United 
Nations Economic and Social Council resolution 2/11 in 1946 “to 
prepare recommendations and reports to the [Council] on promoting 
women’s rights in political, economic, civil, social, and educational 
fields”. The Commission is also mandated to make recommendations to 
11  This topic is dealt with extensively in chap. V, sect. F, below.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS22
22
the Council on “urgent problems requiring immediate attention in the field 
of women’s rights”. The Commission meets once a year and issues agreed 
conclusions on priority themes set for each year. The agreed conclusions 
include an assessment of progress, gaps and challenges, as well as 
concrete recommendations addressed to Governments, international 
organizations, civil society and other stakeholders. The Commission 
also adopts resolutions on a variety of women’s rights-related issues. 
Throughout its history, the Commission has played a key role in promoting 
women’s rights, actively contributing to landmark international legal and 
policy instruments, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women, the Declaration on the Elimination of 
Violence against Women and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for 
Action.


25
iV.
Key concepts
In the past, human rights had been conceptualized in a way that did 
not take account of women’s lives and the fact that women routinely 
faced violence, discrimination and oppression. Consequently, women’s 
experiences were until relatively recently not adequately addressed by the 
human rights framework. The work of activists, human rights mechanisms 
and States has been critical in ensuring that the human rights framework 
has grown and adjusted to encapsulate the gender-specific dimensions 
of human rights violations in order to better protect women. Effectively 
ensuring women’s human rights requires a comprehensive understanding 
of the underlying societal structures and power relations that define 
and influence women’s ability to enjoy their human rights. These power 
structures have an impact on all aspects of life, from law and politics, to 
economic and social policy, family and community life.
The following sections examine some of the key concepts that are critical 
to the protection and promotion of women’s human rights. 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS26
26
A. THE PUBLiC-PRiVATE DiViDE
Human rights law requires State agents to respect, protect and fulfil human 
rights standards and rules established at the international, regional and 
national levels.
Historically, this set of rules and the concomitant scrutiny have focused on 
actions directly attributable to State agents, based on their commission 
or acquiescence, such as killings, torture and arbitrary detention. The 
obligation of States to respect human rights, including women’s rights, 
referred to the obligation to refrain from doing anything that could violate 
those rights. Any wrong committed within the private sphere, without any 
direct intervention by State agents, was not considered a human rights 
violation. However, since the 1980s and 1990s, the women’s rights 
movement has increasingly criticized this interpretation of human rights 
as perpetuating violations of women’s human rights and stemming from 
male bias.12
It is now recognized that the obligations of States to protect and fulfil 
human rights clearly encompass the duty to protect women from violations 
committed by third parties, including in the private sphere, and to take 
positive steps to fulfil their human rights. The Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women covers both public and 
private acts. Its article 2 (e) specifically addresses the obligation of States 
to address discrimination against women perpetrated by any person, 
organization or enterprise, and its article 2 (f) concerns the modification 
and abolition not only of discriminatory laws and regulations, but also 
of customs and practices. Its article 5 (a) requires States “to modify the 
social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women, with a view 
to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and all other 
practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or the superiority 
of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women”.
12  Sheila Dauer, “Indivisible or invisible: women’s human rights in the public and private 
sphere”, in Women, Gender, and Human Rights: A Global Perspective , Marjorie Agosín, 
ed. (Rutgers University Press, 2001).
27
IV. KEY CONCEPTS27
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women as 
well as other United Nations human rights bodies and mechanisms have 
observed that States have obligations to address acts committed by private 
actors. In particular, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women’s general recommendation No. 19 (1992) on violence 
against women spells out that “States may also be responsible for private 
acts if they fail to act with due diligence to prevent violations of rights ….” 
Similarly, the Human Rights Committee confirmed, in its general comment 
No. 31 (2004) on the nature of the general legal obligation imposed on 
States parties to the Covenant, that States have both negative and positive 
obligations—to refrain from violating human rights and to protect as well 
as fulfil human rights, including by protecting rights holders against acts 
committed by private persons or entities. Under human rights law, the 
due diligence standard serves to determine whether the State has taken 
effective steps to comply with its human rights obligations, in particular the 
obligation to protect. 
B. UNiVERSALiTY OF HUMAN RiGHTS
Since the adoption of the Universal Declaration, States have repeatedly 
emphasized the universality and indivisibility of human rights. At the World 
Conference in Vienna they specifically recognized that women’s human 
rights are part of universal human rights and they have subsequently 
reaffirmed this, including at the Fourth World Conference on Women. As 
mentioned above, the Vienna Programme of Action also explicitly stressed 
the importance of eradicating “any conflicts which may arise between the 
rights of women and the harmful effects of certain traditional or customary 
practices, cultural prejudices and religious extremism.”
Despite these commitments by States, the question of universality has 
often been raised when States have tried to justify violations of women’s 
rights in the name of culture. The Special Rapporteur on violence against 
women in her report on cultural practices within the family that are violent 
towards women (E/CN.4/2002/83) highlights female genital mutilation, 
so-called honour killings of women, son preference and witch hunting 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS28
28
as examples of customs that have been defended under the pretext of 
being part of a given culture. Stereotypes and cultural norms which dictate 
prescriptive roles for women in society also have a negative impact on 
women’s enjoyment of their human rights. For instance, girls’ lack of 
access to education has sometimes been justified on the presumption that, 
as mothers and wives, they will not enter the workforce and thus do not 
require education. 
The universality of human rights and their validity in a given local context 
have often been contested through relativist discourses that brand them 
as foreign ideas incompatible with local culture.13 However, the Special 
Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights has warned against discourses that 
disregard the fact that culture is not static and changes over time. She also 
points to women’s lack of influence in decision-making processes which 
define the culture of any given community (A/67/287). 
As mentioned earlier, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women requires States to “take appropriate 
measures to modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men 
and women, with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and 
customary and all other practices which are based on the idea of the 
inferiority or the superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles 
for men and women”. The Committee, in its general recommendation No. 
19 (1992), comments on articles 2 (f), 5 and 10 (c) that attitudes and 
practices according to which women are subordinate to men uphold the 
subjugation of women in society, and thus undermine women’s human 
rights, gender equality and non-discrimination, mentioning the practices of 
family violence and abuse, forced marriage, dowry deaths, acid attacks 
and female circumcision. It also comments on article 12 on the right to 
health, stating that certain traditional practices perpetuated by culture 
and tradition are harmful to the health of women and children. These 
practices include dietary restrictions for pregnant women, preference for 
male children and female circumcision or genital mutilation.
13  See “Intersections between culture and violence against women” (A/HRC/4/34).
29
IV. KEY CONCEPTS29
The Special Rapporteur on violence against women, in her report on 
intersections between culture and violence against women, argues that it is 
possible to negotiate human rights with culture, challenging discriminatory 
and oppressive aspects of culture while retaining its positive aspects. She 
concludes that “compromising women’s rights is not an option. Therefore, 
the challenge that confronts us today is to respect and prize our diverse 
cultures while developing common strategies to resist oppressive practices 
in the name of culture, and to promote and uphold universal human 
rights while rejecting encroachments grounded in ethnocentric thinking”  
(A/HRC/4/34, para. 71).14 
The Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights has also discussed the 
interaction of the principle of universality of human rights, recognition and 
implementation of cultural rights and the need to respect cultural diversity 
(A/HRC/14/36). The Special Rapporteur views the universal promotion 
and protection of human rights, including cultural rights, and respect for 
cultural diversity as mutually supportive. She recalls the Vienna Declaration 
and Programme of Action, the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity 
and Human Rights Council resolution 10/23 to affirm that respect for 
cultural rights or cultural diversity may not undermine the universality of 
human rights. 
C. NON-DiSCRiMiNATiON AND EQUALiTY BETWEEN  
WOMEN AND MEN
Non-discrimination and equality between women and men are central 
principles of human rights law. Both the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex and guarantee women and 
men equality in the enjoyment of the rights covered by the Covenants. Article 
26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights also provides for 
equality before the law and equal protection of the law. 
14  See also OHCHR, Fact Sheet No. 23: Harmful Traditional Practices Affecting the Health 
of Women and Children , and Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, general recommendation No. 14 (1990) on female circumcision.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS30
30
The definition of discrimination in the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women encompasses a variety of possible 
discriminatory actions (any distinction, exclusion or restriction) having 
either the express purpose or the actual effect of discriminating against 
women. The Convention goes further than other human rights treaties in 
also describing in detail the State obligations and actions to be taken to 
achieve gender equality in practice. It not only requires equality between 
women and men, but also prohibits practices that can perpetuate women’s 
inequality. Substantive gender equality and formal gender equality, as 
well as de facto discrimination and de jure discrimination, are central 
concepts in the Convention’s equality framework. 
Discrimination and inequality can occur in different ways. Discrimination 
can occur through de jure or direct discriminatory provisions, such as when 
a law or policy restricts, prefers or distinguishes between certain groups, 
for instance, prohibiting women from driving, owning land or inheriting 
property. Ensuring formal equality requires eliminating all instances of de 
jure discrimination. While much progress has been made to eliminate 
discriminatory laws, many persist and reforming them should be a matter of 
the utmost priority for States to comply with their human rights obligations.15
Laws, policies or programmes can also have detrimental effects on 
women even though they appear to be gender-neutral. This is known as 
de facto discrimination. For instance, aid programmes which distribute 
benefits to the “head of household” may not benefit women equally 
since men are often considered the head of a household. Similarly, given 
women’s disproportionate representation among those living in poverty, a 
government lending scheme to buy land may be inaccessible to women 
due to its cost—even if the scheme is open to both men and women. 
15  Globally, laws that discriminate against women remain a significant problem, and even 
when there are laws in place that guarantee gender equality they are not yet being put 
into practice. See United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN-Women), Progress of the World’s Women 2011–2012: In Pursuit of Justice  
(2011), and “Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights on good practices in efforts aimed at preventing violence against women” (A/
HRC/17/23). See also Working Group on the issue of discrimination against women in 
law and in practice, available from www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Women/WGWomen/
Pages/WGWomenIndex.aspx (accessed 6 November 2013).
31
IV. KEY CONCEPTS31
Achieving substantive equality requires taking both historical inequalities 
and the present conditions of women in a certain context into account. 
Substantive equality may consequently require positive action by the 
State to address the specific disadvantages and needs of women.16 The 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women encompasses substantive equality, recognizing that gender-
neutral laws can have discriminatory effects and that formal equality is not 
enough to address them. Its article 4 on temporary special measures, the 
Committee’s general comment No. 25 (2004) on the same topic, as well 
as article 5 on modifying the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men 
and women, emphasize a commitment to substantive equality.17
Equality of results and substantive equality 
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 
has explained that, to achieve actual equality, the underlying causes of women’s inequality must be addressed; it is not enough to guarantee identical treatment with men. In the Committee’s view, the Convention requires that women should be given an equal start and also that the State should create an enabling environment for the empowerment of women in order to achieve equality of results (also referred to as equality of outcome). Equality of results is the logical consequence of de facto or substantive equality, according to the Committee. Through special measures, historical wrongs and inequalities are corrected by temporarily giving advantages to women, and giving them access to opportunities that traditionally have been out of their reach. Achieving substantive equality requires a change in attitudes, in gender roles and stereotyping; a fundamental societal change which will lead to a change in women’s lived realities.
Source: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general 
recommendation No. 25 (2004) on temporary special measures.
16  See Leilani Farha, “Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women”, 
in Social Rights Jurisprudence: Emerging Trends in International and Comparative Law , 
Malcolm Langford, ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 560–561.
17  Ibid., p. 562.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS32
32
The Human Rights Committee, in its general comment No. 18 (1989) on 
non-discrimination, and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, in its general comments Nos. 16 (2005) on the equal right of men 
and women to the enjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights 
and 20 (2009) on non-discrimination in economic, social and cultural 
rights, have also adopted the same principle of substantive equality when 
guaranteeing non-discrimination and equal enjoyment by men and women 
of civil and political, as well as economic, social and cultural rights. 
The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights explained in its 
general comment No. 16 (2005) that States parties to the Covenant are 
obliged to eliminate both direct and indirect discrimination. They must refrain 
from engaging in discriminatory practices, ensure that third parties do not 
discriminate in a forbidden manner and take positive action to guarantee 
women’s equality. The Committee further outlines how the obligation 
to ensure equality relates to the different provisions of the Covenant. Its 
general comment No. 20 (2009) also notes the importance of addressing 
both direct and indirect discrimination in laws, policies and practices, and 
multiple discrimination, an issue which particularly affects women.
Direct and indirect discrimination
Direct discrimination occurs when a difference in treatment relies directly 
and explicitly on distinctions based exclusively on sex and characteristics of men or of women which cannot be justified objectively.
Indirect discrimination occurs when a law, policy or programme 
does not appear to be discriminatory, but has a discriminatory effect when implemented. This can occur, for example, when women are disadvantaged compared to men with respect to the enjoyment of a particular opportunity or benefit due to pre-existing inequalities. … a gender-neutral law may leave the existing inequality in place, or exacerbate it.
Source: Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, general comment No. 16 (2005).
33
IV. KEY CONCEPTS33
In its general comment No. 28 (2000) on the equality of rights between 
men and women, the Human Rights Committee explains that States 
parties must not only remove obstacles to equality, but that they also 
have obligations to adopt positive measures to ensure equality. It further 
specifies that “States parties should ensure that traditional, historical, 
religious or cultural attitudes are not used to justify violations of women’s 
right to equality before the law and to equal enjoyment of all Covenant 
rights”. It then outlines specific obligations to ensure women’s equal rights 
in relation to the various articles of the Covenant.
D. EQUALiTY AND EQUiTY
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women requires that women be accorded rights equal to those of men and 
that women be able to enjoy all their rights in practice. While international 
human rights treaties refer to “equality”, in other sectors the term “equity” 
is often used. 
The term “gender equity” has sometimes been used in a way that perpetuates 
stereotypes about women’s role in society, suggesting that women should 
be treated “fairly” in accordance with the roles that they carry out.18 This 
understanding risks perpetuating unequal gender relations and solidifying 
gender stereotypes that are detrimental to women. The Committee on 
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has emphasized in 
its general recommendations and concluding observations on different 
countries, e.g., in its general recommendation No. 28 (2010) on the core 
obligations of States parties under article 2 of the Convention, that “States 
18  In development parlance, “equity” is a term commonly used to speak about inequalities 
on a variety of grounds, not only on sex. The word “equity” has sometimes been 
understood as more accessible to a broader public and suggests a need for redistribution. 
However, some have suggested that the term should be used with caution to ensure it 
is not masking a reluctance to speak more openly about discrimination and inequality. 
See, e.g., Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Equity 
and Non-Discrimination Working Group, especially its “Background note on MDGs, 
non-discrimination and indicators in water and sanitation”, available from www.wssinfo.
org/post-2015-monitoring/working-groups/equity-and-non-discrimination/(accessed 
19 May 2014).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS34
34
parties are called upon to use exclusively the concepts of equality of 
women and men or gender equality and not to use the concept of gender 
equity in implementing their obligations under the Convention.” As the 
legal term used in the Convention, gender equality cannot be replaced by 
equity, which is a concept conditioned by subjective criteria.19 
Some stakeholders have also favoured the language of equity on the 
misunderstanding that gender equality means the same or identical 
treatment of men and women, rather than taking into account the actual 
circumstances of men and women. As explained above, substantive 
equality, which is the standard to be met under human rights law, requires 
measures to achieve equality of results. This may mean that women and 
men are not always treated in exactly the same manner, in order to redress 
historical discrimination and/or take account of women’s biological 
differences. 
19  “Building on achievements: women’s human rights five years after Beijing”, May 2000, 
paras. 9–22. Available from www.ohchr.org.
35
IV. KEY CONCEPTS35
Equality, equity and gender equity 
“Inherent to the principle of equality between men and women, or 
gender equality, is the concept that all human beings, regardless of sex, are free to develop their personal abilities, pursue their professional careers and make choices without the limitations set by stereotypes, rigid gender roles and prejudices.”
a The concept of equality between 
men and women includes both formal and substantive equality. 
“Equity is the moral imperative to dismantle unjust differences based 
on principles of fairness and justice. It requires a focus on the most disadvantaged and the poorest. Many [development organizations] have made equity a central part of their agenda. However, from a human rights perspective, relying on equity has certain risks because its definition is a malleable concept that is not legally binding. While equity may denote justice, it may dilute rights claims if considered separately from equality and non-discrimination and risks being defined arbitrarily according to political and ideological expedience.”
b 
Gender equity “is used in some jurisdictions to refer to fair treatment of women and men, according to their respective needs. This may include equal treatment, or treatment that is different but considered equivalent in terms of rights, benefits, obligations and opportunities.”
a
a Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general recommendation No. 
28 (2010) on the core obligations of States parties under article 2 of the Convention, para. 22.
b Catarina de Albuquerque, “The Future is Now: Eliminating inequalities in sanitation, water and 
hygiene”, October 2012. Available from www.ohchr.org.
E. GENDER
Gender refers to socially constructed identities, attributes and roles for 
women and men. The term gender is not interchangeable with women. 
Society’s social and cultural meaning for these biological differences 
results in hierarchical relationships between women and men, and in 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS36
36
the distribution of power and rights favouring men and disadvantaging 
women. This social positioning of women and men is affected by political, 
economic, cultural, social, religious, ideological and environmental 
factors, and can be changed by culture, society and community.
Gender constructions are dynamic and fluid; they change over time and 
can be different in different cultures. As an example of socially learned 
differences, women’s role in most societies has traditionally been to take 
care of the household and the children, whereas the role of men has been 
to provide for the family by working outside the home. In most societies, 
these traditional perceptions of women’s and men’s roles have changed 
and are constantly evolving. 
Analysing international law and international human rights law from 
a gender perspective is important, because gender analysis helps us 
understand how women and men experience human rights violations 
differently as well as the influence of differences such as age, class, 
religion, culture and location. It highlights and explores hierarchical and 
unequal relations and roles between and among males and females, the 
unequal value given to women’s work, and women’s unequal access to 
power and decision-making as well as property and resources. Gender 
mainstreaming or integration helps assess the impact of different laws, 
policies and programmes on groups of men and women, as explained in 
the box below. 
37
IV. KEY CONCEPTS37
Gender mainstreaming
Gender mainstreaming (or integration) is the process of assessing the 
implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to achieve equality between men and women. Gender integration as a strategy and methodology does not in theory mean an emphasis on women’s experiences. However, given the socially constructed differences and relations between males and females in most of the world’s societies, in practice it often results in a specific focus on women because they are mostly adversely affected by existing gender inequalities.
Gender is also an important term to understand in the context of gender 
identity.20 Gender identity reflects a deeply felt and experienced sense 
of one’s own gender, which may or may not conform with the biological 
sex one is assigned at birth. Gender identity is separate from sexual 
orientation, which refers to which sex one is attracted to; for instance, 
many transgender persons are heterosexual. 
F . iNTERSECTiONALiTY AND MULTiPLE FORMS OF DiSCRiMiNATiON
Multi-level and intersecting forms of discrimination have always existed, 
although they have been more broadly acknowledged only in recent 
decades. Age, socioeconomic status, racial or ethnic background, 
religion, national origin, citizenship, status, health, particularly HIV/AIDS 
and disability, as well as poverty and sexual orientation, are examples 
20  See also OHCHR, Born Free and Equal: Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in 
International Human Rights Law  (HR/PUB/12/06). 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS38
38
of factors that can exacerbate or otherwise influence the nature of 
discrimination faced by women.21
At the Fourth World Conference on Women, States recognized that 
“many women face additional barriers to the enjoyment of their human 
rights because of such factors as their race, language, ethnicity, culture, 
religion, disability or socioeconomic class or because they are indigenous 
people, migrants, including women migrant workers, displaced women 
or refugees.” In the Durban Declaration, States declared that they were 
“convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related 
intolerance reveal themselves in a differentiated manner for women and 
girls, and can be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their 
living conditions, poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination, and 
the limitation or denial of their human rights.” They further recognized 
“the need to integrate a gender perspective into relevant policies, 
strategies and programmes of action against racism, racial discrimination, 
xenophobia and related intolerance in order to address multiple forms of 
discrimination.” 
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination also addressed 
this in its general recommendation No. 25 (2000) on gender-related 
dimensions of racial discrimination, in which it noted that “racial 
discrimination does not always affect women and men equally or in the 
same way. There are circumstances in which racial discrimination only 
or primarily affects women, or affects women in a different way, or to a 
different degree than men. Such racial discrimination will often escape 
detection if there is no explicit recognition or acknowledgement of the 
different life experiences of women and men, in areas of both public and 
private life.”
21  See OHCHR, “Women facing multiple forms of discrimination”, April 2009, 
available from www.un.org/en/durbanreview2009/pdf/InfoNote_07_Women_and_
Discrimination_En.pdf; and Colleen Sheppard, “Multiple discrimination in the world of 
work”, Working Paper No. 66 (Geneva, International Labour Organization, September 
2010), available from www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---declaration/
documents/newsitem/wcms_170018.pdf.
39
IV. KEY CONCEPTS39
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, in 
its general recommendation No. 25 (2004), also emphasized that State 
parties should address multiple discrimination against women by adopting 
temporary special measures. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities is the first binding human rights treaty to explicitly address 
multiple discrimination against women and girls, requiring State parties 
to take measures to ensure the equal enjoyment of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms for women and girls with disabilities. 
The Special Rapporteur on violence against women has recognized the 
need to apply an intersectional analysis when researching gender-based 
violence to demonstrate different categories of discrimination against 
women.22 In a recent report on multiple and intersecting forms of violence 
against women (A/HRC/17/26), the Special Rapporteur argues that 
the elimination of violence requires holistic measures that address both 
inter-gender and intra-gender inequality and discrimination. This means 
that the analysis of gender-based violence should take into account 
factors that increase women’s and girls’ vulnerability, such as geographic 
location, level of education, employment situation, household size, marital 
relationships, access to political and civic participation, race, skin colour, 
intellectual and physical abilities, age, language skills and fluency, ethnic 
identity and sexual orientation. 
22  See “15 years of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its 
causes and consequences (1994–2009): a critical review”. Available from http://www2.
ohchr.org/english/issues/women/rapporteur/docs/15YearReviewofVAWMandate.pdf 
(accessed 6 November 2013).

41
V.
The human rights 
framework in 
practice
Since women constitute half the world’s population and are entitled to all 
human rights on an equal basis with men, this publication does not aim to 
cover every human rights issue which touches women’s lives. The focus here 
is on: public and political life, sexual and reproductive health and rights, the 
right to an adequate standard of living, violence against women, migration, 
conflict and crisis, and access to justice. Across all of these, education and 
the family context are particularly pertinent and are addressed throughout. 
The right to education is recognized in the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (art. 13), the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (art. 28), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women (art. 10) and the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (art. 24). Besides calling for non-discrimination in 
the enjoyment of the right to education and free universal primary education, 
human rights law also requires States to address the particular obstacles that 
girls and women face in accessing education, such as early marriages, 
pregnancies, child labour and violence. The needs of girls suffering from 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS42
42
multiple forms of discrimination—e.g., with disabilities, from poor or rural 
areas and belonging to minority communities—should also be considered. 
Ensuring equality in education requires financial resources as well as 
continued awareness-raising about the importance of girls’ education. 
The right to equality between men and women in marriage and family 
life is also recognized in various human rights instruments, including the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Nationality of 
Married Women, and the Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum 
Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages. Women nevertheless 
lag behind men in the enjoyment of rights related to the private sphere. In 
many countries, women are forced to enter marriage, they do not enjoy 
the same rights with regard to guardianship and adoption, they are not 
allowed to transfer their nationality to their children and husbands, and 
they do not have equal legal capacity. The Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women requires State parties to 
take “all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women 
in all matters relating to marriage and family relations” (art. 16). This 
includes ensuring the same right to enter into marriage with free and full 
consent and to freely choose a spouse, the same rights and responsibilities 
during marriage and its dissolution and with respect to their children, 
and the same personal rights as husband and wife, such as the right to 
choose a family name, a profession and an occupation. Rights related 
to access to property and sexual and reproductive health, which will be 
examined separately in this chapter, are also covered by this provision. In 
its general recommendation No. 21 (1994) on equality in marriage and 
family relations, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women called on States to resolutely discourage any notions of inequality 
of women and men in the private sphere which are affirmed by law, 
religion or custom. The Committee also noted that States should prohibit 
polygamous marriages as they contravene a woman’s right to equality 
with men and can have serious emotional and financial consequences for 
her and her dependants. 
43
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE43
A. WOMEN’S RiGHTS iN PUBLiC AND POLiTiCAL LiFE
Historically, women have been excluded from political life and decision-
making processes. Women’s campaigns for participation in the public and 
political arena date back to the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and 
continue today. 
At the time of the First World War, few parliamentary democracies 
recognized women’s right to vote. In 1945, when the United Nations was 
established, more than half of the 51 nations that ratified the Charter still 
did not allow women to vote or gave them only restricted voting rights.23 
According to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, everyone has 
the right to take part in the government of his or her country. One of 
the first tasks of the Commission on the Status of Women was to write 
the 1952 Convention on the Political Rights of Women.24 The Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women builds 
on previous conventions and its article 7 concerns women’s access to 
decision-making in political and public life. Article 7 guarantees the right 
of women to vote in all elections and public referendums and to be eligible 
for election to all publicly elected bodies, the right to participate in the 
formulation of government policy and its implementation, to hold public 
office and perform all public functions at all levels of government, and 
the right to participate in non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or 
associations concerned with the public and political life of the country. 
Article 8 requires State parties to “take all appropriate measures to ensure 
to women, on equal terms with men and without any discrimination, the 
opportunity to represent their Governments at the international level and 
to participate in the work of international organizations.”
Although women’s right to vote has been secured in nearly every country 
of the world, in practice, the right to vote can sometimes be meaningless 
23  Françoise Gaspard, “Unfinished battles: political and public life”, in The Circle of 
Empowerment: Twenty-five Years of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women , Hanna Beate Schöpp-Schilling and Cees Flinterman, eds. (New York, 
Feminist Press at the City University of New York, 2007), pp. 145–153.
24  Ibid., p. 148.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS44
44
when other conditions make it virtually impossible or very difficult for both 
men and women to vote, such as the absence of free and fair elections, 
violations of freedom of expression, or lack of security, which tends to 
affect women disproportionally. In some countries, women cannot register 
to vote because they are missing a birth certificate or identity papers 
that are issued only to men. Other obstacles such as stereotyping and 
traditional perceptions of men’s and women’s roles in society, as well as 
lack of access to relevant information and resources, also inhibit women’s 
possibilities or willingness to exercise their right to vote fully.25 Traditional 
working patterns of many political parties and government structures 
continue to be barriers to women’s participation in public life, and 
women may be discouraged from seeking political office because of their 
double burden of work and the high cost of seeking and holding public 
office, in addition to discriminatory attitudes and practices.26 Among the 
countries that have ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women few have a legal bar to the eligibility 
of women, yet women remain seriously underrepresented at all levels of 
government.
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action deals extensively with the 
issue of women in power and decision-making. Through the Declaration 
and Platform for Action, States are committed to taking concrete measures 
to ensure women’s equal access to and full participation in power 
structures and decision-making, and to increase women’s capacity to 
participate in decision-making and leadership, in accordance with its 
detailed recommendations. 
25  Ibid.
26  Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women , chap. I, resolution 1, annex II, paras. 
181–186 and 190.
45
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE45
Progress still needed to increase women’s political participation
The Beijing Platform for Action sets the objective of achieving a 
balance between women and men in national decision-making positions. However, the goal of equality still eludes many countries. According to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), women represent on average 21.4 per cent of all parliamentarians in 187 countries as of 2013. A survey by IPU shows that since the Beijing Conference attitudes and awareness have improved, but this has yet to lead to significant changes in practice for women’s equal access to public and political life. 
Sub-
Saharan 
AfricaAmericas Asia Europe Middle 
East and 
North 
AfricaPacific
Percentage 
of women 
parliamentarians as of July 200012.4 15.3 14.5 16.2 3.8 11.9
Percentage of women parliamentarians 
as of July 2013
a21.3 24.8 18.8 24.4 15.7 12.8
a Data available at www.ipu.org.
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals, and especially Goal 
3 on gender equality and women’s empowerment, entail a commitment 
by States to promote mechanisms that give women a voice in politics and 
governance institutions. Reviews of the progress achieved on the Goals 
show that women are slowly gaining political power, mainly thanks to 
quotas and special measures. Regional variations remain, however.27
27  See United Nations Department of Public Information, “Goal 3: promote gender equality 
and empower women”, Fact Sheet (DPI/2650 C), September 2010. Available from 
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG_FS_3_EN.pdf. 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS46
46
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women’s 
general recommendation No. 25 (2004) clarifies that the term “special 
measures” can encompass a wide variety of legislative, executive, 
administrative and other regulatory instruments, policies and practices, 
such as outreach or support programmes, allocation and/or reallocation 
of resources, preferential treatment, targeted recruitment, hiring and 
promotion, numerical goals connected with time frames, and quota 
systems. They should be adopted with a view to achieving substantive 
gender equality, which is required by the Convention. 
States have adopted different forms of quota systems. The most common are 
political party quotas, legislative quotas and reserved seats. Political party 
quotas are usually voluntary, party-specific and put in place to increase 
the number of women party candidates or elected representatives, through 
setting a percentage of women. Legislative quotas are binding national 
policies that are enforced through legislation, requiring all political parties 
to include a certain number of women in their lists of candidates for 
elections. Another method is to reserve seats for women in parliament 
through a national policy, which ensures a certain number of female 
legislators.28 Since the Beijing World Conference, States have increasingly 
adopted quotas to boost women’s participation, counter discrimination 
and accelerate the slow pace at which the number of women in politics 
is rising. These measures are meant to correct some of the obstacles, 
especially institutional and systemic barriers, that still prevent women’s 
equal access to politics. 
However, if adopted in isolation, these measures are usually not enough 
to ensure equality. Moreover, they require adaptation to the local context. 
Quotas for women have often been criticized for various reasons, e.g., 
if the women are chosen by political parties or leaders to serve political 
interests which may be contrary to ensuring equality or because quotas 
put too little emphasis on actual merits.29 Quotas for women need to be 
28  Homa Hoodfar and Mona Tajali, Electoral Politics: Making Quotas Work for Women  
(London, Women Living under Muslim Laws, 2011), pp. 42–49.
29  Ibid., pp. 43–45 and 50–57.
47
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE47
coupled with other measures to create an enabling environment for women 
to participate. Particularly, the positive impact of increasing women’s 
representation in public and political life will not be felt if the women 
who gain access are not also empowered to actively participate in the 
discussions and exercise influence in decision-making.30
Participation in public life is, however, much broader than elections 
or being elected to public office. The Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women has explained that the Convention’s article 
7 extends to all areas of public and political life and is thus not limited 
to those specified in the article itself. According to the Committee, the 
political and public life of a country is a broad concept, and can refer to 
the exercise of political power, in particular legislative, judicial, executive 
and administrative powers, all aspects of public administration and the 
formulation and implementation of policy at the international, national, 
regional and local levels. Women’s right to participation also includes 
participating in civil society, public boards, local councils and the activities 
of political parties, trade unions, professional or industry associations, 
women’s organizations, community-based organizations and other 
organizations concerned with public and political life. The Committee’s 
general recommendation No. 23 (1997) on women in political and public 
life emphasizes States’ responsibility to appoint women to senior leadership 
positions, at all levels (local, national, international) of government, all 
government bodies, the judiciary, and to encourage political parties to do 
the same. States should ensure women’s access to information and take 
measures to overcome barriers such as illiteracy, language, poverty and 
barriers to women’s freedom of movement. 
Women’s participation specifically in peacebuilding and peacemaking 
processes is particularly important if post-conflict societies are to be rebuilt 
based on respect for human rights and democratic values. United Nations 
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions and 
30  Farzana Bari, “Women’s political participation: issues and challenges”, draft, United 
Nations Division for the Advancement of Women (EGM/WPD-EE/2005/EP.12), 3 
November 2005, p. 6.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS48
48
reports on women, peace and security, recognize women’s important 
contribution to peace and call for increased representation of women 
at all levels of decision-making, in all mechanisms for the prevention, 
management and resolution of conflicts. This topic is dealt with more in 
depth in section F below.
Women human rights defenders
The Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups 
and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized 
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, also known as the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, recognizes the important role of human rights 
defenders, including that of women defenders, and outlines the rights of 
all human rights defenders and the obligations of States. 
The Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders has 
drawn attention to the specific challenges facing women human rights 
defenders and those working on women’s rights or on gender issues  
(A/HRC/16/44). Women human rights defenders are subject to the 
same types of risks as other human rights defenders, but as women they 
are also targeted for or exposed to gender-specific threats and gender-
specific violence.31 The reasons for this are multifaceted and complex, and 
depend on the specific context in which the individual woman is working. 
Often, the work of women human rights defenders is seen as challenging 
traditional notions of family and gender roles in society, which can lead to 
hostility by the general population and the authorities. They are therefore 
stigmatized and ostracized by community leaders, faith-based groups, 
families and communities that consider them to be threatening religion, 
honour or culture through their work. 
In addition, the work itself or what they are striving to achieve (for instance, 
the realization of women’s rights or any gender-related rights) also makes 
them targets for attack. Their families also become targets for threats 
31  Inmaculada Barcia, “Urgent responses for women human rights defenders at risk, 
mapping and preliminary assessment” (Association for Women’s Rights in Development, 
June 2011), p. iii.
49
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE49
and violence, aiming to discourage women human rights defenders from 
pursuing their work. The Special Rapporteur on the situation of human 
rights defenders has acknowledged that women defenders are more at 
risk of being subjected to certain forms of violence and other violations, 
prejudice, exclusion and repudiation than their male counterparts. It is 
therefore important to strengthen protection mechanisms and other—local 
and international—responses to their specific concerns.
The Special Rapporteur has recommended that States should ensure that 
protection programmes for human rights defenders integrate a gender 
perspective and address the specific needs of women human rights 
defenders. This must include prompt investigation of intimidation, threats, 
violence and other abuses against women human rights defenders whether 
committed by State or non-State actors. In practice, however, women 
human rights defenders are often without effective protection mechanisms. 
Although the State has the primary responsibility to protect defenders 
when they are threatened or attacked, the international community as well 
as the United Nations presences on the ground also have a responsibility 
to support and protect them, bearing in mind the basic principles of 
confidentiality, do no harm and the informed consent of the person. 
The right to a nationality
Women’s ability to participate in public and political life is integrally 
related to their ability to claim citizenship and nationality-related rights. 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women calls on States to “grant women equal rights with men to acquire, 
change or retain their nationality” and to “ensure in particular that neither 
marriage to an alien nor change of nationality by the husband during 
marriage shall automatically change the nationality of the wife, render her 
stateless or force upon her the nationality of the husband” (art. 9). It also 
requires State parties to “grant women equal rights with men with respect 
to the nationality of their children”. The Committee has explained that 
nationality is critical to full participation in society and that not having one 
has a serious impact on the enjoyment of other rights such as the right to 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS50
50
vote, stand for public office, access public benefits and choose a residence. 
Article 15 requires State parties to “accord to women equality with men 
before the law” as well as identical legal capacity in civil matters. The 
Committee has further explained that any restriction in this field seriously 
limits the woman’s ability to provide for herself and her dependants. The 
Committee has also noted with concern the high number of reservations to 
articles 9, 15 and 16, and called on States to withdraw them and to enact 
and enforce legislation in accordance with these articles.
B. SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTiVE HEALTH AND RiGHTS
Reproductive health is defined in the Programme of Action of the 
International Conference on Population and Development as “a state of 
complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence 
of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and 
to its functions and processes.” In 2004, the Special Rapporteur on the 
right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of 
physical and mental health defined sexual health as a state of physical, 
emotional, mental and social well-being related to sexuality, not merely 
the absence of disease, dysfunction or infirmity (E/CN.4/2004/49). This 
definition is based on the recognition in the Programme of Action that 
the purpose of sexual health “is the enhancement of life and personal 
relations, and not merely counselling and care related to reproduction and 
sexually transmitted diseases.” 
Women’s sexual and reproductive health is related to multiple human 
rights, including the right to life, the right to be free from torture, the right 
to health, the right to privacy, the right to education and the prohibition 
of discrimination. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 
have both clearly indicated that women’s right to health includes their 
sexual and reproductive health. This means that States have obligations to 
respect, protect and fulfil rights related to women’s sexual and reproductive 
health. The Special Rapporteur on the right to health maintains that women 
are entitled to reproductive health-care services, goods and facilities that 
51
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE51
are: (a) available in adequate numbers; (b) accessible physically and 
economically; (c) accessible without discrimination; and (d) of good 
quality (A/61/338).
Despite these obligations, violations of women’s sexual and reproductive 
health rights are frequent. These take many forms, such as denying access 
to services that only women require, providing poor-quality services, 
subjecting access to third-party authorization or performing procedures 
without the woman’s consent, including forced sterilization, forced virginity 
examinations and forced abortion. Women’s sexual and reproductive 
health rights are also at risk when they are subjected to female genital 
mutilation and early marriage. 
Violations of women’s sexual and reproductive health rights are often 
deeply ingrained in societal values pertaining to women’s sexuality. 
Patriarchal concepts of women’s roles within the family mean that women 
are often valued according to their ability to reproduce. Early marriage and 
pregnancy or repeated pregnancies spaced too closely together, often as 
the result of efforts to produce male offspring because of the preference for 
sons, have a devastating impact on women’s health with sometimes fatal 
consequences. Women are also often blamed for infertility, and ostracized 
and subjected to various human rights violations as a result. 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women guarantees women equal rights in deciding “freely and responsibly 
on the number and spacing of their children and to have access to the 
information, education and means to enable them to exercise these rights” 
(art. 16). It also specifies that women’s right to education includes “access 
to specific educational information to help to ensure the health and well-
being of families, including information and advice on family planning” 
(art. 10). Furthermore, sexual and reproductive health is considered to be 
a vital element of the right to the highest attainable standard of physical 
and mental health. Women’s childbearing role can also have an impact 
on their enjoyment of other rights such as the rights to education and to 
work. 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS52
52
The Beijing Platform for Action states that “the human rights of women include 
their right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters 
related to their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of 
coercion, discrimination and violence.” The Committee on the Elimination 
of Discrimination against Women, in its general recommendation No. 24 
(1999) on women and health, recommends that States should prioritize 
the “prevention of unwanted pregnancy through family planning and sex 
education.” In its general comment No. 14 (2000) on the right to the 
highest attainable standard of health, the Committee on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights explained that the provision of maternal health services 
is comparable to a core obligation which cannot be derogated from under 
any circumstances, and State parties have the immediate obligation to take 
deliberate, concrete and targeted steps towards fulfilling the right to health 
in the context of pregnancy and childbirth. 
Access to information about sexual and reproductive health
Women’s right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing 
of their children and to have access to the information, education and 
means to exercise this right requires attention to their access to information 
on modern methods of contraception and comprehensive sex education. 
Women’s access to modern methods of contraception
According to the United Nations Population Fund, there were 1.4 
billion women of reproductive age (between 15 and 49) in 2008, of whom 818 million, or more than half, wanted to avoid a pregnancy. Of those, 603 million were using modern contraceptive methods and 215 million were not. Unintended pregnancies are overwhelmingly attributable to the unmet need for modern contraception. Of the women who became pregnant unintentionally, 66 per cent were not using any method of contraception and 16 per cent relied on traditional methods, such as periodic abstinence and withdrawal, which have higher rates of failure than modern methods. Women’s and girls’ susceptibility to contracting HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases is another serious consequence of not using modern contraception.
53
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE53
Women’s lack of information on contraception has a direct impact on 
their right to decide on the number and spacing of their children, as 
well as on their right to health. The Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women, in its general recommendation No. 21 
(1994), explained that “in order to make an informed decision about 
safe and reliable contraceptive measures, women must have information 
about contraceptive measures and their use, and guaranteed access to 
sex education and family planning services, as provided in article 10 (h) 
of the Convention.” Such information should be scientifically accurate and 
free from discrimination. While practitioners have a right to conscientious 
objection, the protection of that right must not infringe on women’s right 
to accurate and objective information on contraception. The European 
Court of Human Rights, for instance, has held that pharmacists may not 
refuse to sell contraceptives based on their personal religious beliefs.32 The 
Committee on the Rights of the Child, in its general comment No. 4 (2003) 
on adolescent health and development, specified that “States parties should 
ensure that [adolescents] have access to appropriate information [on 
sexual and reproductive issues, including family planning, contraception 
and the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases], regardless of their 
marital status and whether their parents or guardians consent.” 
Access to services and medicines
Ensuring that women have access to services which are required only 
by women is a key aspect of eliminating discrimination against women. 
Guaranteeing the availability, accessibility, quality and acceptability 
of these services and medicines is central to ensuring women’s sexual 
and reproductive health rights. The Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women, in its general recommendation No. 24 
(1999), further specified that “it is discriminatory for a State party to 
refuse to legally provide for the performance of certain reproductive health 
services for women”, highlighting that “laws that criminalize medical 
procedures only needed by women and that punish women who undergo 
those procedures” are barriers to women’s access to health care.
32  Pichon and Sajous  v. France , application No. 49853/99, decision of 2 October 2001.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS54
54
It is estimated that 287,000 women died in childbirth in 2010. In 
addition, every year an estimated 10 million women suffer a pregnancy-
related injury, infection, disease or in some cases long-term disability. 
Ensuring universal access to skilled attendance at childbirth, emergency 
obstetric care, post-partum care, preventing unsafe abortion and widening 
contraceptive choices are some of the interventions that have been shown 
to reduce maternal mortality and morbidity.
In the case of Alyne da Silva Pimentel Teixeira (deceased)  v. Brazil ,33 the 
victim, a woman of African descent, died after a stillbirth and serious 
postnatal complications. Failures in diagnosing the complications suffered 
by the victim, delays in treating those complications, delays in referring 
her to a hospital with superior facilities and failures in the transmission 
of her records between health facilities, followed by lack of adequate 
response and redress for these failures, resulted in a finding of violations 
of the Convention. 
The Committee found that the State party had violated its obligations under 
article 12 (in relation to access to health), article 2 (c) (in relation to access 
to justice) and article 2 (e) (in relation to the State party’s due diligence 
obligation to regulate the activities of private health service providers), in 
conjunction with article 1, of the Convention. The Committee underlined in 
its decision that the State is directly responsible for the actions of its private 
medical institutions when it outsources its medical services, and that it 
maintains a duty to regulate and monitor private health-care institutions in 
line with its due diligence obligations. The Committee further noted that 
the State must ensure that its maternal health services meet the specific 
needs of women, that policies on maternal health are implemented in 
practice, and that adequate judicial remedies and effective protection are 
provided without discrimination.
Ensuring access to safe and affordable sexual and reproductive health 
services includes the need to ensure access to safe and affordable 
abortion. Although access to modern contraceptive methods and family 
33  Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, communication No. 
17/2008, Views of 25 July 2011.
55
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE55
planning reduce the risk of an unplanned pregnancy, no contraceptive 
method is 100 per cent effective. The work of human rights mechanisms 
indicates that States should ensure access to abortion at least where there 
is a threat to the woman’s life or health, or where the pregnancy is the 
result of rape or incest.34 In its general recommendation No. 24 (1999), 
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women also 
stated that “when possible, legislation criminalizing abortion could be 
amended to remove punitive provisions imposed on women who undergo 
abortion.” Decriminalization of abortion services was also emphasized 
in the Beijing Platform for Action, which recommended that States should 
consider reviewing laws containing punitive measures against women 
who have undergone illegal abortions.35 In all circumstances, access to 
post-abortion health services must be accessible, safe and affordable. 
Unsafe abortion is a leading cause of maternal mortality and morbidity, 
and ensuring that abortion services are accessible and safe is thus also an 
important part of the State’s obligation to ensure that women are enabled 
to survive pregnancy. 
34  See, e.g., Human Rights Committee, general recommendation No. 28 (2000) on 
the equality of rights between men and women, para. 11, and its 2012 concluding 
observations on Guatemala (CCPR/C/GTM/CO/3, para. 20) and the Dominican 
Republic (CCPR/C/DOM/CO/5, para. 15).
35  Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women , chap. I, resolution 1, annex II, para. 
106 (k). The Special Rapporteur on the right to health presented a report in 2011 to 
the General Assembly (A/66/254) on criminalization and other legal restrictions on 
reproductive health services, including abortion. He concluded that “States must take 
measures to ensure that legal and safe abortion services are available, accessible, and 
of good quality” and called on States to “decriminalize abortion” and to “consider, as 
an interim measure, the formulation of policies and protocols by responsible authorities 
imposing a moratorium on the application of criminal laws concerning abortion”. In 
addition, post-abortion medical services, regardless of the legality of abortion, must 
always be available, safe and accessible.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS56
56
Treaty body jurisprudence on abortion
L.M.R.  v. Argentina  (Human Rights Committee, communication No. 
1608/2007, Views adopted on 29 March 2011)
L.M.R. was a minor girl with an intellectual disability, who had become 
pregnant as a result of rape by her uncle. She was denied a legal 
abortion. The Committee found a violation of article 7 of the Covenant 
(torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment), since the State’s 
failure to guarantee her right to a termination (which in this case would 
have been in accordance with Argentine law) had “caused L.M.R. 
physical and mental suffering constituting a violation of article 7 of the 
Covenant that was made especially serious by the victim’s status as a 
young girl with a disability.” The Committee called on the State party 
to provide the victim with redress, including adequate compensation.
K.L. v. Peru (Human Rights Committee, communication No. 
1153/2003, Views adopted on 24 October 2005)
K.L. was a 17-year-old girl whose foetus was determined to have a 
condition which would prevent its survival for more than a few days 
following birth. She requested an abortion, but the service was denied 
since abortion was legal only to save the mother’s life but not in cases 
of foetal impairment. K.L. had to carry the pregnancy to term and 
was then made to breastfeed the baby, who died four days after 
birth. In finding a violation of article 7, the Human Rights Committee 
found that the depression and emotional distress of the 17-year-old 
girl were foreseeable consequences of the State’s failure to enable 
her to undergo a therapeutic abortion. (Note the State party did not 
cooperate in the proceedings.)
57
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE57
L.C. v. Peru (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, communication No. 22/2009, Views adopted on 17 
October 2011)
L.C. was a minor girl, victim of sexual abuse, who had attempted suicide 
when she had found out that she had become pregnant as a result of 
the abuse. She survived but sustained serious injuries, including to her 
spine, that required urgent surgery. She and her mother requested a 
legal abortion so that the operation could proceed. This was denied 
by a hospital, claiming that the victim’s life was not in danger. Finally, 
after 3.5 months and having miscarried, she had the surgery but she is 
currently paralysed from the neck down, having regained only partial 
movement in the hands. The Committee found a violation of her right 
to health, since the decision on the abortion had not taken sufficiently 
into account the damage of the decision on her mental and physical 
health. Her health would have required access to both the surgery and 
the therapeutic abortion, especially given the circumstances (her age, 
the suicide attempt and sexual abuse).
Regarding access to medicines, WHO has included modern methods 
of contraception, including emergency contraception, in its Model List 
of Essential Medicines. Recognizing that access to medicines to ensure 
sexual and reproductive health can sometimes be restricted on political, 
cultural or legal rather than medical grounds, the Special Rapporteur on 
the right to health has called on States to “ensure that access to essential 
medicines for treating ... sexual and reproductive health ... is based purely 
on health needs and evidence and not restricted on account of extraneous 
non-health considerations” (A/HRC/23/42, para. 73 (b)). 
Consent
Ensuring women’s sexual and reproductive health rights means that 
women’s capacity to make decisions regarding their bodies must be 
respected. Requirements of third-party consent for access to certain 
services have been consistently criticized by human rights mechanisms as 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS58
58
contrary to women’s rights.36 For instance, the Human Rights Committee, 
in its general comment No. 28 (2000), deemed legal provisions requiring 
the husband’s consent for a woman to undergo sterilization a violation of 
the woman’s right to privacy. 
According to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, in its general recommendation No. 19 (1992), compulsory 
sterilization or abortion adversely affects women’s physical and mental 
health, and infringes their right to decide on the number and spacing 
of their children. In A.S. v. Hungary ,37 a doctor in a public hospital 
performed a forced sterilization procedure on a patient without providing 
adequate information to gain the patient’s consent. The Committee found 
a violation of the petitioner’s right to equality in education, especially 
regarding information pertaining to family planning, the right to equality 
in accessing health care and the right to equality in the family, especially 
regarding the right to decide the number, spacing and timing of children. 
Persons with disabilities face particular risks of being subjected to 
involuntary medical procedures pertaining to their sexual and reproductive 
health. Article 23 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities reinforces the right of people with disabilities to found and 
maintain a family and to retain their fertility on an equal basis with others. 
Article 12 reaffirms the right of persons with disabilities to recognition 
everywhere as persons before the law and to enjoy legal capacity on an 
equal basis with others, including access to the support they may require 
to exercise their legal capacity. Article 25 clearly articulates that free and 
36  Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general recommendation 
No. 24 (1999) on women and health, and its comments on State party reports, for 
instance on Indonesia (CEDAW/C/IDN/CO/5, para. 16) and on Turkey (A/52/38/
Rev.1, para. 196); and Committee on the Rights of the Child, general comment No. 
15 (2013) on the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard 
of health. The latter has commented that the need for parental consent for abortion 
has increased the number of illegal abortions among adolescents (see its concluding 
observations on Kyrgyzstan (CRC/C/15/Add.127, para. 45)) and has in several cases 
recommended that States should provide adolescents with youth-friendly rehabilitation 
and counselling services.
37  Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, communication No. 
4/2004, Views adopted on 14 August 2006.
59
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE59
informed consent should be the basis for providing health care to persons 
with disabilities. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
recommended “the abolition of surgery and treatment without the full and 
informed consent of the patient” in one of its first concluding observations 
to a State party.38
Torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in health-care 
settings
In his 2013 report to the Human Rights Council, the Special Rapporteur 
on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment analysed human rights abuses in health-care settings which are tantamount to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and existing protection gaps in this regard. He devoted specific attention to violations of reproductive rights. He explains that “forced sterilization is an act of violence, a form of social control, and a violation of the right to be free from torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.” He called on States to “safeguard free and informed consent on an equal basis for all individuals without any exception, through legal framework and judicial and administrative mechanisms, including through policies and practices to protect against abuses.”
In the same report, he also recalls the Committee against Torture’s 
concern about absolute bans on abortion as violating the prohibition of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. He recommended that States “ensure that women have access to emergency medical care, including post-abortion care, without fear of criminal penalties or reprisals.” 
Source: A/HRC/22/53.
38  Concluding observations: Tunisia (CRPD/C/TUN/CO/1, para. 29). See also “Thematic 
study on the issue of violence against women and girls and disability” (A/HRC/20/5).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS60
60
The right to a safe and healthy pregnancy
Complications during pregnancy and childbirth are a leading cause of 
death and disability among women of reproductive age in developing 
countries. There is no single cause of death and disability for men between 
the ages of 15 and 44 that is close to the magnitude of maternal mortality.39  
The World Health Organization defines maternal death as the death of 
a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, 
irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause 
related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management, but not 
from accidental or incidental causes. Maternal morbidity is a condition 
outside of normal pregnancy, labour and childbirth that affects a woman’s 
health during those times.40
States are obliged under international human rights law to respect, protect 
and fulfil human rights in relation to maternal health, pregnancy and 
childbirth. When women die in childbirth due to preventable causes, many 
human rights obligations of the State come into play. For instance, to protect 
women’s right to life, States need to ensure that available resources are 
used and that the necessary measures are taken to ensure the availability, 
accessibility, acceptability and good quality of sexual and reproductive 
health services, including their affordability. Preventable maternal deaths 
can also entail violations of the right to the highest attainable standard 
of physical and mental health, including sexual and reproductive health, 
the rights to equality and non-discrimination, the rights to information and 
education and to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress. 
Applying a human rights-based approach to maternal mortality and 
morbidity entails inter alia looking at preventable maternal mortality and 
morbidity from an equality and non-discrimination perspective, analysing 
State obligations under human rights law as well as gaps in protection, 
39  See D. Maine and A.E. Yamin, “Maternal mortality as a human rights issue: measuring 
compliance with international treaty obligations”, Human Rights Quarterly , vol. 21, No. 
3 (August 1999).
40  Susan A. Orshan, Maternity, Newborn and Women’s Health Nursing: Comprehensive 
Care across the Life Span  (Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams and 
Wilkins, 2008), p. 15.
61
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE61
participation and accountability. The human rights-based approach 
facilitates reaching specific groups of women who are excluded from 
access to essential health services.
A human rights-based approach to maternal mortality
The Human Rights Council requested the Office of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Human Rights to prepare a series of reports on maternal mortality and morbidity as a human rights issue. In the first report in 2010 (A/HRC/14/39), the High Commissioner outlined seven important principles of a human rights-based approach: non-discrimination, accountability, participation, transparency, empowerment, sustainability, and international cooperation. In 2011, a compilation of good practices (A/HRC/18/27) was presented, in which the High Commissioner observed five common features of good practices to reduce maternal mortality and morbidity in line with human rights obligations: enhancing the status of women by removing barriers to an effective human rights-based approach to eliminate maternal mortality and morbidity, ensuring sexual and reproductive health rights, strengthening health systems to increase access to and use of skilled care, addressing unsafe abortion, and improving monitoring and evaluation.
In 2012, the High Commissioner prepared technical guidance on 
the application of a human rights-based approach to policies and programmes to reduce preventable maternal mortality and morbidity (A/HRC/21/22). The guidance is aimed principally at policymakers seeking to design maternal health policies in accordance with human rights requirements. It follows the policy cycle of planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and accountability, including details of the required steps from a human rights perspective at each stage.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS62
62
C. WOMEN’S RiGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD OF LiViNG
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
mentions the right to adequate food, clothing and housing, and the 
continuous improvement of living conditions as part of the right to an 
adequate standard of living for oneself and one’s family (art. 11). Women’s 
rights to land, property, food, water and sanitation, as well as work and 
social security, are intrinsically linked to the right to attain an adequate 
standard of living. All these rights are guaranteed under international 
human rights law, including the right to enjoy these rights on an equal 
basis with men, without discrimination. Women’s access to services, to 
education and to productive resources is paramount to the realization of 
the above-mentioned rights. 
Land, property, housing
Rights to land, housing and property are essential to women’s equality 
and well-being. Women’s rights in, access to and control over land, 
housing and property are a determining factor in their living conditions 
especially in rural economies, essential to women and their children’s daily 
survival, economic security and physical safety. Despite the importance 
of these rights for women and female-headed households, women still 
disproportionally lack security of tenure.41 This is often because property 
is registered in a man’s name; the father, husband or brother. In the event 
of separation, divorce or widowhood, the man or his family often retains 
rights to the property or the land whereas the woman becomes homeless 
or will have to share the property with her in-laws without gaining control 
or rights over it. 
Access to land and housing is governed through land tenure systems. 
Land tenure is the relationship, whether legally or customarily defined, 
among people, individuals and groups, with respect to land. According 
to general comment No. 4 (1991) on the right to adequate housing of 
41  United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, Women’s Rights to Land, Housing and 
Property in Post-conflict Situations and During Reconstruction: A Global Overview , Land 
Management Series No. 9 (Nairobi, 1999), p. 12.
63
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE63
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, tenure takes a 
variety of forms, including rental (public and private) accommodation, 
cooperative housing, lease, owner-occupation, emergency housing and 
informal settlements, including occupation of land or property. Regardless 
of the type of tenure, all persons should possess a degree of security 
of tenure which guarantees legal protection against forced eviction, 
harassment and other threats.
Discriminatory legislation on and lack of control over property, land and 
housing also mean that women are excluded from community decision-
making processes that are led by men who normally are the landowners. 
In rural communities, ownership of land determines both social status and 
the way in which control is exercised over a household’s resources and 
income. Women’s disadvantaged economic position in this regard creates 
a structural dependence on men for access to resources, which in turn can 
subject women to insecurity and violence. 
Cultural and religious practices, as well as customary practices, can 
also have an impact on women’s rights related to land, property and 
housing. These practices often exist in parallel with statutory laws.42 They 
may discriminate against women regarding property, land and housing, 
and sometimes trump national laws (these practices are never codified 
but can in practice supersede laws, for instance when implemented 
locally or when used as interpretation of statutory laws). This happens 
in particular in rural areas, where customs and practices still shape and 
influence family matters and determine the position of women. Most 
often, these customs or practices make women’s access to or control over 
land, property and housing dependent on a man—the husband, father 
or brother. In practice, the interpretation of statutory laws is influenced 
by customary laws or practices to the detriment of women’s rights. 
Customary forums for decision-making are normally dominated by men. 
Women can rarely participate in decision-making with respect to land, 
42  Women and the Right to Adequate Housing  (United Nations publication, Sales No. 
E.11.XIV.4). See also UN-Women and OHCHR, Realizing Women’s Rights to Land and 
Other Productive Resources  (2013).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS64
64
property and housing even though these issues affect them directly and 
seriously. Gender bias within the official administration also leads to the 
exclusion of women from decision-making on policies and programmes 
on housing and land.43
Women suffering from multiple forms of discrimination—e.g., older 
women, women with disabilities, women living with HIV/AIDS or women 
belonging to minority communities or indigenous groups—face additional 
obstacles in accessing land and property. For instance, in some places 
widows, often older women, are blamed for killing their husbands by 
infecting them with HIV and in-laws use this as a justification to dispossess 
them and evict them. Women then lose access to productive resources 
which they badly need to pay for their medical care. 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights establishes the right of 
everyone to own property regardless of sex (art. 17.1 and 2), the right 
to an adequate standard of living including housing and to security in the 
event of a lack of livelihood (art. 25), and states that everyone should 
have equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution 
(art. 16). The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in its 
broad non-discrimination provision (art. 26), guarantees equality before 
the law and prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex. This applies 
equally to legislation and policies on property, housing and land rights. 
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
also guarantees the right to adequate housing (art. 11). Furthermore, 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women specifically requests States to undertake all appropriate measures 
to eliminate discrimination against rural women, and to guarantee their 
enjoyment of adequate living conditions, including housing (art. 14.2). 
It also stipulates that State parties should undertake all appropriate 
measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all matters relating 
to marriage and family relations, and in particular to ensure the same 
43  Women and the Right to Adequate Housing , chap. II, sects. C and F.
65
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE65
rights for spouses in respect of the ownership, acquisition, management, 
administration, enjoyment and disposition of property (art. 16.1).44
In the Beijing Platform for Action, States committed to “undertake 
legislation and administrative reforms to give women equal rights with 
men to economic resources, including access to ownership and control 
over land and other forms of property, credit, inheritance, natural 
resources and appropriate new technology.” The 1996 United Nations 
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in Istanbul, Turkey, and its 
Istanbul Declaration and Habitat Agenda provide a plan of action on 
rights, including the rights of women in human settlements development. 
It commits States to providing legal security of tenure and equal access to 
land for all, including women and people living in poverty. 
Women are disproportionately affected by forced evictions, protection 
against which is a key element of security of tenure and the right to adequate 
housing. Eviction can take place only under certain very exceptional 
circumstances and under strict criteria imposed by international law. States 
have to take certain measures to comply with international standards, such 
as adopt and implement special measures to protect women from evictions, 
for instance by conferring titles to land and housing to women. States have 
to assess the differentiated impact of evictions on women so that the specific 
impact on them is addressed appropriately. Women have equal rights to all 
44  According to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, under 
the Convention women should be accorded a legal capacity identical to that of men, 
so that a woman can enter into contracts, own property and have access to financial 
credit without a husband’s or male family member’s guarantee or concurrence. The right 
to own, manage, enjoy and dispose of property is central to a woman’s right to enjoy 
financial independence, and is also in many countries critical to her ability to earn a 
livelihood and to provide adequate housing and nutrition for herself and her children. 
With regard to marital property, even if the law gives women the right to own an equal 
share of the property during marriage or when the marriage ends, in practice there are 
many obstacles such as discriminatory laws or customs that hinder women’s exercise of 
those rights and States should address these. The same applies to inheritance laws and 
practice, and the Committee urges States to abolish legal provisions on inheritance that 
do not reflect the principles of equal ownership of property acquired during marriage 
(general recommendation No. 21 (1994)). See also Leilani Farha, “Women and 
housing”, in Women and International Human Rights Law , Kelly D. Askin and Dorean M. 
Koenig, eds., vol. 1 (Ardsley, New York, Transnational Publishers, 1999), pp. 510–513.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS66
66
relevant information, full consultation and participation throughout the entire 
process of eviction. In the event of eviction, remedies and compensation 
should be equally available to women and States should ensure that women 
are not subjected to discrimination or to sexual or gender-based violence. 
Women must be co-beneficiaries of any compensation packages, and 
widows or single women are entitled to their own compensation.
Violence against women and their right to housing
Research has demonstrated the links between domestic violence and 
women’s right to adequate housing and this has been highlighted 
throughout the work of the Special Rapporteurs on violence against 
women and on the right to adequate housing. If women’s right to 
adequate housing is not sufficiently protected, women become more 
vulnerable to violence. Domestic violence has been found to be a 
leading cause of women’s (and often their children’s) homelessness, 
and many women try to avoid homelessness by staying in abusive 
relationships. Women who are property owners or landowners 
experience less domestic violence, which points to the importance of 
guaranteeing women’s security of tenure.  
Assumptions that a woman has to “leave” an abusive home instead of 
removing the abusive husband and the lack of support for removing the 
abusive partner by local authorities, community and/or family laws and 
regulations, greatly undermine women’s right to adequate housing as 
well as their right to live a life free of violence. Overcrowding, poverty 
and unemployment also have an impact on the above-mentioned 
rights and directly affect the level of violence and sexual abuse in 
homes and communities. In addition, insufficient protection for victims 
of domestic violence, including insufficient shelter homes, legal aid 
and information to women about their rights, has an impact on the 
level of domestic violence and women’s homelessness. Consequently, 
States should address all these issues as issues of women’s rights to 
property, land, housing, life, personal security, gender equality and 
being free from violence and discrimination.
67
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE67
A.T. v. Hungary (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women, communication No. 2/2003, Views adopted on 26 
January 2005)
In A.T. v. Hungary , a case on domestic violence, the Committee ruled 
that shelter homes should always be available to provide effective 
protection to victims of domestic violence. Furthermore, the State 
party was called upon to take immediate and effective measures to 
guarantee the physical and mental integrity of A.T. and her family and 
ensure that she is given a safe home in which to live with her children, 
receives appropriate child support and legal assistance as well as 
reparation proportionate to the physical and mental harm undergone 
and to the gravity of the violations of her rights.
Food, water and sanitation
The rights to food, water and sanitation are equally crucial for women’s 
well-being, dignity and enjoyment of other human rights. Poor female 
nutrition early in life reduces learning potential and productivity, and 
increases reproductive and maternal health risks. This undermines 
attempts to eliminate gender inequalities throughout a woman’s lifespan, 
having an effect on issues such as women’s access to resources. Investing 
in women’s nutrition improves the overall development capacity of a 
country, considering the role women have in the household with regard 
to food production, food preparation and childcare.45 Women’s and girls’ 
disadvantaged health status and their traditional role in water collection 
and sanitation management in many societies have a negative impact on 
them, and it has been recognized that a lack of water and sanitation also 
disproportionately affects them. Women and girls have greater need for 
privacy when using toilets and when bathing, especially when menstruating, 
and in addition not having easy access to toilets and bathrooms makes 
them more vulnerable to rape and other forms of gender-based violence.
45  Women and the Right to Food: International Law and State Practice , Right to Food 
Studies (Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2008), p. 8.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS68
68
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
recognizes the right to food, and acknowledges that more immediate 
and urgent steps may be needed to ensure everyone’s fundamental right 
to freedom from hunger and malnutrition (art. 11). The Committee on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights specified, in its general comment 
No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food, that this right entails that 
food has to be physically and economically accessible to all. According to 
the Committee, the State obligation is to take whatever steps are necessary 
to ensure that everyone is free from hunger and as soon as possible 
can enjoy the right to adequate food. This requires the development of 
a national strategy on food security, which has to specifically address 
the need to prevent discrimination in access to food or resources for 
food, including guaranteeing full equal access for women to economic 
resources, “including the right to inheritance and the ownership of land 
and other property, credit, natural resources and appropriate technology; 
measures to respect and protect self-employment and work which provides 
a remuneration ensuring a decent living for wage earners and their 
families.” 
According to the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, closing the gender 
gap in agriculture is essential for achieving Millennium Development Goal 
1. For this purpose, the Special Rapporteur recommends measures such 
as “eliminating discriminatory laws and cultural practices; supporting 
the development of women’s cooperatives; employing more women in 
the extension services sector; titling schemes combined with broader 
agricultural support; issuing titles in the name of both the husband and 
wife; and encouraging more diverse farming practices such as diverse 
crop plantings and combining cash crops with subsistence crops”.46 The 
Special Rapporteur notes that women are a huge interest group and a 
major actor in realizing the right to food, but are rarely heard since they 
are underrepresented legally, economically and politically. While women 
make up 80 per cent of the world’s agricultural labour force, they own 
46  www.srfood.org/en/gender (accessed 8 November 2013).
69
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE69
less than 1 per cent of land and account for less than 1 per cent of credit 
offered to farmers globally.47
In 2010 the United Nations General Assembly recognized the right 
to clean water and sanitation as a human right, through its resolution 
64/292. This right is intrinsically linked to the right of everyone to a 
decent standard of living (International Covenant on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights, art. 11.1) and the right to the highest attainable 
standard of physical and mental health (ibid., art. 12.1), according 
to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Water is a 
prerequisite for living a life in dignity and the enjoyment of several other 
human rights depends on the accessibility of water. The Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women stipulates that 
State parties should ensure women’s adequate living conditions, inter alia 
in relation to water supply (art. 14.2). The Committee on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights underscores, in its general comment No. 15 (2002) 
on the right to water, that they should give particular attention to ensuring 
marginalized farmers, including women farmers, have equitable access 
to water and water management systems. Water has to be available, of 
sufficiently good quality, and accessible both economically and physically, 
without discrimination. 
State parties have immediate obligations in relation to the right to water, 
including certain core obligations that represent a minimum level to which 
the obligations laid down in the Covenant have to be fulfilled at all times. 
Ensuring the right to access water and water facilities and services on a 
non-discriminatory basis, especially for marginalized or disadvantaged 
groups, is part of these core obligations. In relation to women’s right 
to water, general comment No. 15 (2002) specifies that States should 
take steps to ensure that women are not excluded from decision-making 
processes concerning water resources and entitlements, and that the 
disproportionate burden on women to collect water is alleviated. 
47  Ibid. See also gender resources on the website of the Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations: www.fao.org/gender/gender-home/gender-resources/en/ 
(accessed 8 November 2013).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS70
70
The Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water 
and sanitation explained in her report on stigma and the realization 
of the human rights to water and sanitation (A/HRC/21/42) how the 
intersection of different attributes can compound the discrimination 
faced by certain groups or persons, such as being a woman and a sex 
worker, a woman infected with HIV, or being a woman and belonging 
to a certain marginalized group. The stigma these groups of women 
face greatly affects their access to water and sanitation. Menstruating 
women also suffer stigma and menstruation remains a taboo in many 
countries. Women often lack the appropriate facilities and the needed 
privacy to change or wash during menstruation, and cultural perceptions 
that menstruating women are “contaminated” or “impure” lead to their 
reduced mobility or even seclusion, as well as to dietary restrictions and 
restricted access to water resources and food during menstruation. The 
taboos and deeply rooted practices surrounding menstruation also have 
a negative impact on girls’ right to education, since girls may be absent 
from school during menstruation, either because there are no appropriate 
facilities at school or because they are isolated by their family owing to 
cultural practices. To combat silence and stigma, States should make sure 
that there is sufficient access to information on menstruation and hygiene, 
including comprehensive sexual education in schools on menstruation, 
targeting both girls and boys. The provision of adequate hygiene facilities 
must be ensured as well. 
The right to decent work and to social security
In addition to other rights, the right to work and to social security is closely 
linked to the right to an adequate standard of living and the continuous 
improvement of living conditions for oneself and one’s family. According to 
the International Labour Organization (ILO), women experience systemic 
barriers in almost every aspect of work, ranging from whether they have 
paid work at all, to the type of work they obtain or are excluded from, 
the availability of support such as childcare, the level of their pay, their 
working conditions, their access to higher paying “male” occupations, the 
insecurity of their jobs, the absence of pension entitlements or benefits, 
71
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE71
and the lack of time, resources or information necessary to enforce their 
rights.48 Women make up the majority of the poor in both developed and 
developing nations, and they face multiple barriers to accessing social 
security too, owing to their roles as mothers, carers, informal workers, 
migrants, and precarious and part-time workers. 
The general right to work is set out in the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (art. 6). The Covenant further 
recognizes everyone’s right to enjoy just and favourable conditions of 
work, in particular the right to safe working conditions (art. 7). It also 
addresses collective rights related to the right to work, such as the right to 
form trade unions and the right to join a trade union of one’s choice (art. 
8). As the Committee explains in its general comment No. 18 (2005) on 
article 6 of the Covenant, the work has to be decent, that is to say, respect 
the fundamental rights of the individual as well as those of the worker to 
safe working conditions and remuneration. States should therefore take 
measures to reduce to the extent possible the number of workers outside 
the formal economy (predominantly women) who thus lack any protection 
by the State. Work must be available, accessible without discrimination 
on any grounds, and acceptable to the individual worker. Again, the State 
has an immediate obligation to guarantee that the right to work will be 
enjoyed without discrimination, and to take deliberate, concrete, targeted 
steps towards the realization of the right to work and full employment. 
The Committee further underlines the need for “a comprehensive system 
of protection to combat gender discrimination and to ensure equal 
opportunities and treatment between men and women in relation to their 
right to work by ensuring equal pay for work of equal value. In particular, 
pregnancies should not constitute an obstacle to employment and should 
not constitute justification for loss of employment.” 
The main ILO convention relevant to gender equality with respect to work 
is the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention No. 111 
(1958), which stipulates that States are to declare and pursue a national 
48  See www.ilo.org/public/english/support/lib/resource/subject/gender.htm (accessed 
8 November 2013).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS72
72
policy to promote equality of opportunity and treatment in respect of 
employment and occupation, with a view to eliminating discrimination, 
which would include discrimination based on sex. Other notable 
conventions are the Equal Remuneration Convention No. 100 (1951), 
which specifically addresses equal remuneration for work of equal value, 
the Workers with Family Responsibilities Convention No. 156 (1981) and 
the Maternity Protection Convention No. 183 (2000). Numerous other ILO 
conventions are relevant from a gender perspective including conventions 
on employment promotion, working conditions, as well as on specific 
categories, such as persons with HIV/AIDS, indigenous and tribal people, 
migrant workers, and domestic workers.49
The right to social security, including social insurance, is also provided 
for in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
(art. 9). According to the Committee’s general comment No. 19 (2007) 
on the right to social security, social security is of central importance in 
guaranteeing human dignity for all persons, when they are faced with 
circumstances that deprive them of their capacity to fully realize their 
Covenant rights. The right to social security encompasses the right to 
access and maintain benefits without discrimination in order to secure 
protection, inter alia, from lack of work-related income caused by sickness, 
disability, maternity, employment injury, unemployment, old age, or death 
of a family member, unaffordable health care or insufficient family support, 
particularly for children and adult dependants. 
The right to social security has to be enjoyed equally by men and women 
(International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, arts. 2.2 
and 3). In its general comment No. 16 (2005) on the equal right of men 
and women to the enjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights, the 
Committee notes that the implementation of article 3 in conjunction with 
article 9 requires, for instance, equalizing the compulsory retirement age 
for both men and women, ensuring that women receive the equal benefit 
49  ILO, Gender Equality and Decent Work: Selected ILO Conventions and Recommendations 
that Promote Gender Equality as of 2012 , 3rd rev. ed. (Geneva, 2012). Available from 
www.ilo.int/global/standards/information-resources-and-publications/publications/
WCMS_088023/lang--en/index.htm.
73
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE73
of public and private pension schemes, and guaranteeing maternity leave 
for women, paternity leave for men and parental leave for both men and 
women. In its general comment No. 19 (2007) on the right to social 
security, the Committee explains that State parties should take steps to 
eliminate factors that prevent women from contributing equally to social 
security schemes that link benefits to contributions. Differences in the 
average life expectancy of men and women need to be taken into account 
in the design of schemes, since they can lead to de facto discrimination, 
and non-contributory schemes also have to take into account that women 
more often than men live in poverty and often have the sole responsibility 
for the care of their children. Contributory pension schemes can accentuate 
inequalities, with older women more likely to receive lower pensions and 
other contributory benefits.50 General recommendation No. 27 (2010) 
on older women and protection of their human rights further discusses 
the different types of discrimination older women face. Women are less 
present in the formal sectors of employment and tend to be paid less for 
the same work or work of equal value. According to the Committee, such 
gender-based discrimination throughout women’s lives has a cumulative 
effect in old age, leading to disproportionally low incomes and low 
pensions or even no pension. 
D. ViOLENCE AGAiNST WOMEN
The Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women defines 
“violence against women” as “any act of gender-based violence that 
results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm 
or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary 
deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.” 
Since the beginning of the 1990s, violence against women has gained 
much attention in the human rights discourse. However, it took a long 
and persistent struggle by the women’s rights movement to persuade the 
international community to discuss violence against women as a human 
50  See also the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the 
human rights situation of older persons (E/2012/51), para. 51.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS74
74
rights concern and recognize that gender-based violence is a serious 
violation of human rights of global importance which poses a threat to 
human development as well as international peace and security. 
The agenda for the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights held in 
Vienna did not originally mention women or any gender aspects of human 
rights. It was the women’s rights movement that brought attention to the issue 
of violence against women during the Conference, leading inter alia to the 
recognition, in the Vienna Declaration, of the elimination of violence against 
women in public and private life as a human rights obligation.51 Subsequently, 
the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence 
against Women in December 1993. This was the first international instrument 
to specifically address this issue. It recognizes that violence against women 
constitutes a violation of the rights and fundamental freedoms of women 
and a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men 
and women. The Declaration calls on States to condemn violence against 
women and work towards its eradication. The Commission on Human Rights 
appointed a Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes 
and consequences in 1994. The creation of this mandate has enabled a 
dynamic development of human rights standards to respond to contemporary 
challenges and emerging issues with respect to violence against women. 
The Special Rapporteur has, through her research, significantly developed 
concepts and legal frameworks pertaining to women’s human rights and 
51  Charlotte Bunch and Niamh Reilly, Demanding Accountability: The Global Campaign 
and Vienna Tribunal for Women’s Human Rights  (Center for Women’s Global Leadership, 
1994), pp. 2–8. The issues raised in Vienna by the Global Campaign, a coalition of 
women’s rights organizations, stemmed from concerns put forward by the women’s rights 
movement that had emerged over the previous decade, with its roots in global women’s 
rights movements during the United Nations Decade for Women (1976–85), challenging 
the traditional approach to human rights purporting that human rights would be limited 
to violations committed by State agents, in the public sphere, and against (mostly male) 
dissidents or political opponents, as well as the predominance of civil and political rights 
over other human rights. Through organizing the Global Tribunal on Women’s Human 
Rights during the Vienna Conference, with women from all over the world speaking out 
about their experiences of violence, the Global Campaign managed to draw the attention 
of the international community to the seriousness of occurring violations of women’s human 
rights. As a result, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action contained an extensive 
section on women’s human rights and declared that “the human rights of women and of the 
girl-child are an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights”.
75
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE75
violence against women.52 The Fourth World Conference on Women 
reaffirmed the conclusions of the Vienna World Conference, listing violence 
against women as one of 12 critical areas of concern.53
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women does not explicitly mention violence against women, but the 
Committee, in its general recommendation No. 19 (1992) on violence 
against women, asserted that violence against women is “violence 
directed against a woman because she is a woman or affects women 
disproportionately”. This violence seriously inhibits women’s ability to 
enjoy rights and freedoms on a basis of equality with men. The adoption 
of this general recommendation was a critical precursor to the recognition 
of this issue at the Vienna World Conference. 
Women in all countries, irrespective of status, class, age, caste or religion, 
experience violence in virtually all spheres of life, whether in the home, 
at work, on the street, in government institutions, or in times of conflict 
or crisis. Violence is also present throughout the lifetime of a woman, 
affecting girls and older women too. Specific groups of women suffering 
from various forms of discrimination, such as women with disabilities 
or migrant women, lesbian, bisexual and transgender women, are 
particularly vulnerable to violence. Understanding that violence against 
women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between 
men and women, a human rights analysis posits that the specific causes 
of such violence and the factors that increase the risk of its occurrence are 
grounded in the broader context of systemic gender-based discrimination 
against women and other forms of subordination. Vulnerability to violence 
is understood as a condition created by the absence or denial of rights.54
52  See “15 years of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on violence against women”, 
pp. 10 and 24–28.
53  Arvonne Fraser, “Becoming human: the origins and development of women’s human 
rights”, in Women’s Rights: A Human Rights Quarterly Reader , Bert B. Lockwood, ed. (Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2006), p. 53. See also “Beijing and its follow-up”, available from 
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/ (accessed 8 November 2013), and Sally Engle 
Merry, Human Rights and Gender Violence, Translating International Law into Local Justice  
(University of Chicago Press, 2006), p. 21. In the earlier global 1975 and 1980 world 
conferences on women, gender violence was not treated as a major issue.
54  “In-depth study on all forms of violence against women” (A/61/122/Add.1), para. 65.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS76
76
Violence against women in the family can take the form of domestic 
violence or harmful or degrading practices that are violent to and/or 
subordinate women. Country visits by the Special Rapporteur on violence 
against women have shown that domestic violence remains widespread 
and affects women of all social strata (A/66/215). Harmful and degrading 
practices, such as dowry-related violence or so-called honour crimes, also 
continue, without systematic monitoring, punishment or redress, despite 
advances in legislation prohibiting them. Other examples of violence 
in the family are domestic assault (physical, psychological, emotional, 
financial or sexual violence), marital rape, femicide or gender-motivated 
killings (domestic murder, ritual killings or killings of women accused of 
witchcraft, lynching, as well as gender identity- and sexual orientation-
related or ethnic or indigenous identity-related killings), child marriage, 
female genital mutilation and sex-selective abortion.55
Other forms of violence against women occur in the community. Examples 
of such violence can be rape/sexual assault, sexual harassment, violence 
within institutions, violence against women migrant workers, witchcraft- 
or sorcery-related violence or killings (A/66/215 and A/HRC/11/2). 
Although in the majority of cases younger women are at higher risk of 
witchcraft-related violence, in some parts of Africa older women are more 
vulnerable to sorcery-related femicide owing to their economic dependence 
on others or the property rights that they hold (A/HRC/20/16).
Violence against women is also perpetrated or condoned by the State. 
This type of violence can include gender-based violence during conflict, 
disappearance or extrajudicial killings, custodial violence, violence 
against refugees and internally displaced women, or women from 
indigenous or minority groups (A/66/215). As will be explained below, 
State responsibility can also be invoked for private acts, i.e., when State 
officials are not the direct perpetrators of the violence.
55  Radhika Coomaraswamy and Lisa M. Kois, “Violence against women”, in Women and 
International Human Rights Law , vol. 1, pp. 184–186. See also the Special Rapporteur on 
violence against women’s report on gender-related killings of women (A/HRC/20/16), 
para. 16.
77
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE77
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women: 
jurisprudence
In Şahide Goekce (deceased) v. Austria, communication No. 5/2005, 
the complainants claimed that the State had failed to guarantee the 
right to life and personal security of Ms. Goekce, who was killed by her husband after continued domestic violence that had been reported to the police. The police had been aware that her husband had a handgun and had threatened to kill her on several occasions.
In Fatma Yildirim (deceased) v. Austria, communication No. 6/2005, 
the victim had also been killed by her husband after several death 
threats, which had been reported to the police. The complainants claimed that the State had failed to take appropriate positive measures to protect the victim’s right to life and personal security. 
In both cases the Committee recommended that the State party strengthen 
its implementation and monitoring of national laws on domestic violence, by “acting with due diligence to prevent and respond to such violence against women and adequately providing for sanctions for the failure to do so.” The Committee found that there had been a violation of the rights of the deceased to life and physical and mental integrity under article 2 (a) and (c)–(f), and article 3 of the Convention read in conjunction with article 1 and its general recommendation No. 19 (1992). It considered that, given the combination of factors, the police knew or should have known that the victims were in serious danger, and therefore considered that the police were accountable for failing to exercise due diligence to protect the victims.
The Committee clarifies in its general recommendation No. 19 (1992) that 
State parties may be held responsible for private acts of violence, if they 
“fail to act with due diligence to prevent violations of rights or to investigate 
and punish acts of violence, and for providing compensation.” This due 
diligence obligation of States is also repeated in the United Nations 
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women. The Special 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS78
78
Rapporteur on violence against women has referred to the due diligence 
standard in terms of the State’s obligation to prevent, prosecute, punish and 
compensate for acts of violence against women (E/CN.4/2006/61).56 
In her 2011 report to the General Assembly (A/66/215), the Special 
Rapporteur outlined evolving practices on the due diligence standard, 
jurisprudence and remaining challenges. According to the Special 
Rapporteur, the State’s due diligence obligation under international 
human rights law consists of preventing, investigating, punishing  acts of 
violence against women, protecting  women from violence, and providing 
an effective remedy and reparation  to victims of violence.
56  In various areas of law, the due diligence standard is used to assess whether a State is 
meeting its obligations. For human rights law, the standard serves as a tool for rights 
holders to hold duty bearers accountable by providing an assessment framework for 
ascertaining what constitutes effective fulfilment  of the obligation, and for analysing 
the actions or omissions of the duty bearer. This is especially important if the potential 
infringement comes through a duty bearer’s failure to act , as it can be difficult for 
rights holders to assess if an omission constituted a violation of their right without some 
normative basis for the appraisal.
79
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE79
inter-American Court of Human Rights: jurisprudence
González et al. (“Cotton Field”)  v. Mexico  (Judgement of 16 November 
2009), concerning the abduction, sexual violence and killing of two 
children and a woman by non-State actors, was one of hundreds of 
similar cases of disappearance, rape and murder of predominantly 
migrant women and girls that had occurred in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. 
The Court considered for the first time States’ affirmative obligations 
to respond to violence against women by private actors; it looked at 
the cases in the context of mass violence against women and structural 
discrimination, and found that the violence against women constituted 
a form of discrimination. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
interpreted broadly the due diligence obligations of the State to 
prevent, investigate and impose penalties for violence against women. 
Using the concept of gender-sensitive reparations with a transformative 
approach, striving not only for restitution but for rectification, the 
Court declared that the reparations should be “designed to identify 
and eliminate the factors that cause discrimination” and in doing so 
should aim at transforming the underlying gender inequalities that 
gave rise to the violence. In addition, the Court ordered Mexico to 
comply with a broad set of remedial measures, including building a 
national memorial, conducting renewed investigations and providing 
reparations of over $200,000 each to the families in the suit.
The Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions 
has also addressed killings committed by private actors, such as murders 
by gangs, vigilante justice, “honour killings” or domestic violence killings. 
According to the mandate, an isolated private killing is a domestic crime 
and does not give rise to State responsibility. However, where there 
is a pattern of killings and the State’s response (with respect to either 
prevention or accountability) is inadequate, the responsibility of the State 
is engaged. Under human rights law, the State is not only prohibited from 
directly violating the right to life, but is also required to ensure the right 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS80
80
to life, and must meet its due diligence obligations to take appropriate 
measures to deter, prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish perpetrators 
(A/HRC/14/24).
With regard to gender-related killings of women, the Special Rapporteur 
on violence against women reported in 2012 that their prevalence 
is increasing and a lack of accountability for such crimes is the norm  
(A/HRC/20/16). The Special Rapporteur explained that these incidents 
are not isolated but represent the ultimate act experienced in a continuum of 
violence by women living under conditions of gender-based discrimination. 
The Special Rapporteur added that a holistic approach to preventing 
gender-related killings must be emphasized in all the measures taken by 
States to investigate and sanction violence, in particular in designing, 
implementing and evaluating legislation and policies.
The Human Rights Committee, in its general comment No. 28 (2000), 
underlined that all the Covenant’s civil and political rights should be 
ensured on a basis of equality between men and women and, in its 
general comment No. 20 (1992) on the prohibition of torture, or other 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, that it is the duty 
of the State party to afford everyone protection through legislative and 
other measures as may be necessary against torture or cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment, whether inflicted by people acting 
in their official capacity, outside their official capacity or in a private 
capacity. In addition, the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment argues for the torture 
protection framework to be applied in a gender-inclusive manner with a 
view to strengthening the protection of women from torture. According to 
the Special Rapporteur, State obligations under the Convention against 
Torture clearly extend to the private sphere as well, in addition to violations 
committed by public officials (A/HRC/7/3).
The Committee against Torture, in its general comment No. 2 (2008) on the 
implementation of article 2 by States parties, also further clarified that the 
requirement under the Convention against Torture’s article 1 of “consent or 
acquiescence” by the State is equivalent to a due diligence obligation for 
81
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE81
the State to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish torture by non-State 
officials or private actors consistently with the Convention. The Committee 
has applied this principle to State parties’ failure to prevent and protect 
victims from gender-based violence, such as rape, domestic violence, 
female genital mutilation and trafficking. 
The Special Rapporteur on torture mentions rape and other forms of 
sexual violence such as threats of rape, touching, “virginity testing”, being 
stripped naked, invasive body searches, insults and humiliations of a 
sexual nature, as well as forced abortion and denial of access to safe 
abortion to women who have become pregnant as a result of rape, as 
forms of violence that could constitute gender-based torture. According to 
the Special Rapporteur, the powerlessness of the victim and the purpose of 
the act are the most decisive elements to determine whether an act amounts 
to torture, or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The Special 
Rapporteur has further pointed out that, given the particular vulnerability 
of women with disabilities, forced abortions and sterilizations of these 
women if they are the result of a lawful process by which decisions are 
made by their “legal guardians” against their will, may also constitute 
torture or ill-treatment. Violence in the name of honour, sexual violence 
and harassment, as well as slavery-like practices often of a sexual nature, 
domestic violence (in the form of intimate partner violence), female genital 
mutilation and human trafficking can also constitute gender-based torture, 
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, according to the Special 
Rapporteur (A/HRC/7/3).
The Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances has 
also recognized the gender-specific aspects of disappearances, whether 
women are themselves victims of disappearances or family members of 
disappeared persons. In this regard, it has emphasized the State obligations 
to prevent and respond to all instances of gender-based violence, including 
enforced disappearances, securing women’s participation in truth-seeking 
processes, and protecting women’s right to a remedy, among other 
requirements (A/HRC/WGEID/98/2). 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS82
82
In general, both a broader understanding of violence against women and 
a more gender-sensitive interpretation of human rights law are developing 
and, globally, there is more awareness of the severity of the problem of 
violence against women. Many countries have made significant progress 
by adopting new legislation on violence against women, but application of 
the law, proper training of law enforcement officials, as well as adequate 
and accessible protection, prevention and reintegration measures remain 
a challenge.57
European Court of Human Rights: jurisprudence
In Opuz  v. Turkey , application No. 33401/02, the applicant alleged 
that the Turkish authorities had failed to protect the right to life of her 
mother and had been negligent in the face of the repeated violence, 
death threats and injury to which she herself had been subjected.
The Court found that:
-  There had been a violation of article 2 (right to life) of the European 
Convention on Human Rights in respect of the applicant’s mother, 
who was killed by the applicant’s ex-husband despite the fact that the 
authorities had been repeatedly alerted about his violent behaviour;
-  There had been a violation of article 3 (prohibition of torture and 
of inhuman and degrading treatment) on account of the authorities’ 
failure to protect the applicant against her ex-husband’s violent and 
abusive behaviour; and
-  There had been a violation of article 14 (prohibition of discrimination) 
read in conjunction with articles 2 and 3 on account of the violence 
suffered by the applicant and her mother having been gender-
based, which amounted to a form of discrimination against women, 
especially bearing in mind that, in cases of domestic violence in 
Turkey, the general passivity of the judicial system and impunity 
enjoyed by aggressors mainly affected women.
57  A/61/122/Add.1; Progress of the World’s Women 2011–2012 ; “Advancement of 
women” (A/66/215), chap. III; and A/HRC/17/23, chap. III.
83
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE83
Vulnerability to trafficking related to discrimination and violence against 
women
Discrimination can be linked to trafficking in a number of ways. It is no 
coincidence that those most likely to be trafficked (irregular migrants, 
stateless persons, non-citizens and asylum seekers, members of minority 
groups) are especially susceptible to discrimination and intolerance, based 
on their gender, race, ethnicity, religion and other distinguishing factors. 
In addition to increasing the risk of trafficking, discriminatory attitudes, 
perceptions and practices contribute to shaping and fuelling the demand 
for trafficking.
According to the Palermo Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish the 
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, trafficking in 
persons means “the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or 
receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms 
of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power 
or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments 
or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another 
person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a 
minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of 
sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar 
to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs” (art. 3 (a)).
Racial and gender-based discrimination in the denial of economic and 
social rights is a critical factor in rendering certain persons more susceptible 
to trafficking than others. In both cases, the impact of discrimination results 
in fewer and poorer life choices. This lack of genuine choice can, in turn, 
make women and girls more vulnerable to trafficking than men, particularly 
in certain circumstances and for women and girls of certain nationalities 
and ethnicities. For example, minority women and girls, women and girls 
living in poverty, or women and girls living in conflict or post-conflict 
settings may face increased risks of being trafficked. 
Although trafficking can also affect men, it is a form of violence particularly 
experienced by women. Violence directed against or primarily affecting 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS84
84
women can be a factor making them more vulnerable to trafficking. For 
example, women may accept dangerous migration arrangements in order 
to escape the consequences of entrenched discrimination including family 
violence and lack of protection against such violence. Women may also be 
more vulnerable than men to coercion and force at the recruitment stage, 
increasing their susceptibility to being trafficked in the first place. States, 
particularly countries of origin, can address increases in vulnerability to 
trafficking-related discrimination and violence against women through 
a range of practical measures, such as providing safe shelter with 
medical, psychological and legal facilities for women experiencing 
violence. Longer-term measures that seek to address the social, cultural 
and structural causes of violence are also important. These may include: 
reforming legislation that either discriminates against women or fails to 
address violence against women; ensuring the prompt investigation and 
prosecution of complaints related to violence against women; providing 
access to effective remedies for gender-based violence; and implementing 
initiatives aimed at educating the public and relevant officials about 
violence against women.
The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and 
children, has reported on a number of issues related to the protection of 
victims of trafficking, and her work represents useful guidance for States 
on adopting a human rights-based approach to trafficking.58 In addition, 
OHCHR has issued Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human 
Rights and Human Trafficking, providing further guidance on the matter. 
The human rights of trafficked persons should be at the centre of all 
efforts by States to prevent and combat trafficking, and States have a due 
diligence obligation to investigate, prosecute and punish traffickers and 
provide assistance to trafficking victims.59
58  See www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Trafficking/Pages/Annual.aspx (accessed 8 November 
2013).
59  Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking: 
Commentary  (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.10.XIV.1).
85
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE85
OHCHR Recommended Guidelines on Human Rights  
and Human Trafficking 
1. Promoting and protecting the human rights of trafficked persons, migrants, 
asylum seekers, refugees and internally displaced persons should be at 
the centre of all anti-trafficking measures.
2. Identifying traffickers and trafficked persons is the responsibility of States, 
in order to ensure victims’ rights and bring traffickers to justice.
3. Effective anti-trafficking measures must be based on current and accurate 
information, experience and analysis.
4. Ensure an adequate national legal framework that implements and 
corresponds to international standards, including adequate protection of 
victims of trafficking and witnesses.
5. Ensure an adequate law enforcement response. Investigation and 
punishment of any law enforcement involvement in trafficking are 
paramount, as are awareness training for law enforcement officials and 
training in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking.
6. Ensure protection and support for trafficked persons, without discrimination. 
Safe and adequate shelter, health and counselling services should be 
made available.
7. Prevent trafficking through strategies taking into account its root causes, 
including demand, and for instance awareness campaigns, based on 
accurate information.
8. Special measures for child victims of trafficking are necessary given their 
vulnerability and the physical and psychosocial harm they suffer.
9. Ensure access to remedies. Trafficked persons have an international legal 
right to adequate remedies and reparation, and they should be given 
legal assistance to exercise that right.
10. The obligations of peacekeepers, civilian police, humanitarian and 
diplomatic personnel include ensuring that they do not become involved 
in trafficking, and that any such involvement is thoroughly investigated 
and punished. 
11. Cooperation and coordination between States and regions are crucial, 
since trafficking is a cross-border, global phenomenon that requires 
effective international, multilateral and bilateral cooperation to eradicate.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS86
86
E. iMPACT OF MiGRATiON AND DiSPLACEMENT ON THE ENJOYMENT 
OF WOMEN’S RiGHTS
The principle of universality in international human rights law implies that 
States of origin, transit and destination are responsible for protecting 
the rights of migrants within their territories. Although countries have a 
sovereign right to determine conditions of entry and stay in their territories, 
they also have an obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights 
of all individuals under their jurisdiction, regardless of their nationality, 
origin, gender or age and regardless of their immigration status.60
Every country is affected by the phenomenon of migration, as country of 
origin, transit or destination, or a combination of these. More than 200 
million people now live outside their home countries, for reasons ranging 
from seeking better economic opportunities to escaping persecution. 
Female migrants form half the world’s migrant population and outnumber 
male migrants in developed countries.61 Migrants contribute greatly to the 
economies of their countries of origin through remittances, and to their host 
countries through their work while also bringing cultural and demographic 
diversity to that society.
Traditionally, immigration has been looked at mainly from an economic 
perspective, as a by-product of globalization or a solution to unemployment 
and poverty. This has to some extent led to immigrants being treated as 
commodities instead of individuals with rights. A purely economic analysis 
of immigration fails to take into account the human value of the individual 
immigrant and the inherent human right to a life in dignity.62
60  See, e.g., Human Rights Committee, general comment No. 31 (2004), para. 10; 
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, general recommendation No. 30 
(2004) on discrimination against non-citizens, para. 7; and Committee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights, general comment No. 20 (2009), para. 30.
61  See www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/Pages/MigrationAndHumanRightsIndex.aspx 
(accessed 8 November 2013); and Global Migration Group, International Migration and 
Human Rights: Challenges and Opportunities on the Threshold of the 60th Anniversary 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  (2008), p. 1.
62  Global Migration Group, International Migration and Human Rights , p. 5.
87
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE87
Female migration has both positive and negative repercussions. It has 
great potential and can advance gender equality by empowering migrant 
women, since many migrate independently nowadays and become 
the main breadwinners for their families. However, migration can also 
increase vulnerabilities and put migrant women at risk of discrimination 
and violence. Women and children who migrate also become more 
vulnerable to other forms of exploitation. Those in an irregular situation are 
particularly vulnerable. Women migrants are often found in segregated 
and unregulated sectors of the economy, such as domestic work, typically 
unprotected by local labour laws and organizations.63
Irregular migrants often end up in administrative detention. The Special 
Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants noted in his 2012 report 
to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/20/24) that migrant women who 
are detained may be vulnerable to sexual violence committed by male 
detainees or guards. The Special Rapporteur encouraged States to give 
particular attention to the situation of migrant women in detention. While 
women migrants who are travelling with their families and are detained 
should be kept together in accordance with the principle of family unity, 
other women migrant detainees should be separated from men, and 
attended and supervised only by women officers, in order to protect them 
against sexual violence. The Special Rapporteur also recommended that 
pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers should not be detained.
An important milestone was the adoption by the General Assembly in 
1990 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of 
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. This Convention 
reiterates the rights already contained in the major human rights treaties 
accorded to all persons, regardless of their migration status.
The Convention protects the rights of all migrant workers and their family 
members, in both regular and irregular situations, during the entire migration 
process. It covers all aspects of the life of migrants and their families, and 
entails obligations for States to promote sound, equitable, humane and legal 
63  See ibid., pp. 1–2, 19 and 45.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS88
88
conditions of migration. Under the Convention, States must take measures to 
ensure that the situation of migrants in an irregular situation does not persist 
(art. 69). The duty of States to provide information to migrants and their 
family members on their rights under the Convention (art. 33) is especially 
important for women migrants, who often have limited access to reliable 
information regarding legal migration channels.64 
The rights of migrants have been addressed at international conferences 
such as the International Conference on Population and Development in 
Cairo in 1994, which pointed out the need to address the root causes of 
migration, especially those related to poverty, and the World Conference 
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance 
in Durban, South Africa, in 2001, which stressed that policies on migration 
should not be based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia or related 
intolerance. Additionally, the Programme of Action of the International 
Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action and General Assembly resolution 58/143 on violence 
against women migrant workers urged States to better protect the rights of 
migrant women. The Beijing Platform for Action calls on States to:
Ensure the full realization of the human rights of all women 
migrants, including women migrant workers, and their protection 
against violence and exploitation; introduce measures for the 
empowerment of documented women migrants, including 
women migrant workers; facilitate the productive employment 
of documented migrant women through greater recognition of 
their skills, foreign education and credentials, and facilitate 
their full integration into the labour force. 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women protects all women, including migrant women, against all forms 
of discrimination and requires State parties to ensure that all women can 
enjoy their human rights, de jure and de facto, on an equal basis with 
men in all fields. In some countries of origin, women face a range of 
64  Ibid., p. 18.
89
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE89
discriminatory restrictions or bans on their migration, which leads many 
to migrate through irregular or informal channels, leaving them outside 
the protection of the law and vulnerable to abuse by agents, smugglers 
and traffickers. Women often have limited access to reliable information 
and education, which can further exacerbate their vulnerability. In transit 
countries, women risk different types of abuse, such as sexual and 
physical abuse by the escort or agent. Migrant women frequently end 
up in gender-insensitive work environments in the country of employment, 
where notions of what type of work is appropriate for women limit their 
options to domestic work and certain forms of entertainment. In many 
countries, these fields of work are not regulated and thus the women are 
excluded from any protection of the law. 
Women migrants may also face multiple and intersecting forms of 
discrimination, such as xenophobia or racism, in addition to discrimination 
based on sex. Older migrant women may face additional challenges. 
Generally, they find it harder to learn the local language, find employment 
and access the health services they need. Older women staying in the 
country of origin are also particularly affected by migration, as very often 
they have to take care of the children left behind by migrant parents. Owing 
to discrimination, women migrant workers often receive lower wages and 
suffer deplorable working conditions, and lack access to appropriate 
health services, including reproductive health services. Domestic workers 
in particular are vulnerable to physical, sexual and other types of abuse 
by their employers. Access to justice in countries of destination is also 
limited for many migrant women. Migrant women in an irregular situation 
are particularly vulnerable to abuse, isolation and limited access to health 
services or to the justice system.
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, in 
its general recommendation No. 26 (2008) on women migrant workers, 
addresses the discrimination and violence that some categories of women 
migrants face. In particular, it addresses the situation of women migrants who 
“are in low-paid jobs, may be at high risk of abuse and discrimination and 
who may never acquire eligibility for permanent stay or citizenship, unlike 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS90
90
professional migrant workers in the country of employment” and addresses 
violations of women’s human rights that occur before departure in the 
country of origin, in the country of transit, and in the country of destination. 
According to the Committee, female migration and the impact of migration 
on women has to be understood through a gendered analysis, taking into 
account gender inequality, traditional roles of women, a gendered labour 
market, the global prevalence of gender-based violence, feminization of 
poverty and labour migration. The Committee recommends that States 
should take a number of measures aimed at improving the legal protection 
of female migrants and ensuring access to remedies and to services.
The Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants highlighted, in 
her 2004 report to the Commission on Human Rights (E/CN.4/2004/76), 
that a number of factors make migrant domestic workers a particularly 
vulnerable group. For instance, she had received several reports of abuse of 
domestic migrant workers, who are mainly female, suffering discrimination, 
physical or sexual abuse by the host family and often related depression. In 
some cases the women work in slavery-like conditions and their employers 
frequently take away their passports. They lack access to services or 
protection mechanisms and do not report abuse for fear of being deported.
In its general comment No. 1 (2011) on the right of migrant domestic 
workers, the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant 
Workers and Members of Their Families also identified several gaps in 
the protection of these workers, including their legal protection, as many 
national laws exclude domestic work and workers, thereby contributing 
to exploitative labour practices and limiting legal avenues of redress. 
In many countries, domestic workers are not recognized as “workers” 
entitled to protection by labour laws. Strict immigration laws lead to many 
migrant domestic workers being in an irregular situation, outside the 
protection of the law, or dependent on the employer, since their immigrant 
status depends on the employer’s continued sponsorship. Contract law 
and social security laws also often do not apply to domestic workers. Even 
if some countries have legislation protecting domestic workers, in practice 
protection gaps remain. Factors such as the nature of the work, language 
barriers, isolation and dependence contribute to this. 
91
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE91
The Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its 
causes and consequences has noted that combating domestic servitude 
and protecting domestic workers’ rights are two sides of the same coin (A/
HRC/15/20). The Special Rapporteur called on States to adopt specific 
provisions to criminalize servitude in all its forms and manifestations, 
and punish perpetrators with due diligence, as well as extend the equal 
protection of their labour laws to domestic workers, including migrant 
domestic workers, and end any discriminatory denial of entitlements 
regarding working hours, rest days, vacation, health care, maternity leave 
and protection from unfair dismissal.65
Women refugees and internally displaced women have specific protection 
needs, including because of their increased vulnerability to sexual 
and gender-based violence. Factors such as displacement amplify the 
discrimination women and girls already endure in “normal conditions” or 
during peacetime. Women and girl refugees or internally displaced women 
and girls are exposed to specific protection problems related to their gender, 
cultural and socioeconomic position as well as their legal status. They have 
limited access to basic rights such as the rights to food, heath care, housing, 
documentation and a nationality compared to men and boys.66
65  On 16 June 2011, the ILO Convention concerning decent work for domestic workers 
(No. 189) was adopted to address gaps in the protection of domestic workers. It 
stipulates that domestic workers around the world who care for families and households 
must have the same basic labour rights as other workers, including rights to reasonable 
hours of work, weekly rest of at least 24 consecutive hours, a limit on payment in 
kind, clear information on terms and conditions of employment, as well as respect for 
fundamental principles and rights at work, including freedom of association and the 
right to collective bargaining. At the same time the General Conference of ILO issued 
its Recommendation concerning decent work for domestic workers (No. 201), as further 
guidance to States for implementing the Domestic Workers Convention, which came into 
force on 5 September 2013.
66  See Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), UNHCR 
Handbook for the Protection of Women and Girls  (January 2008); UNHCR, Sexual and 
Gender-based Violence against Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons: 
Guidelines for Prevention and Response  (May 2003); and UNHCR, “Guidance note on 
refugee claims related to female genital mutilation”, May 2009.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS92
92
F . WOMEN’S HUMAN RiGHTS iN CONFLiCTS AND CRiSES 
Sexual and gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict settings
In armed conflict or political strife, violence against women takes severe 
forms. During the past decade, much international attention has been paid 
to the link between gender-based violence and conflicts. Conflict has far-
reaching effects on women’s enjoyment of their human rights, whether civil 
and political or economic and social.67
Despite increased global efforts to combat gender-based violence in conflict 
and post-conflict settings, women continue to be subjected to gender-based 
violence such as rape, sexual slavery, kidnapping or trafficking, forced 
impregnation or miscarriages, and sexual abuse such as forced nudity, 
strip searches and other publicly humiliating and violating acts in conflict 
and post-conflict.68 Studies have shown that while men and boys are also 
victims of gender-based violence, women account for the vast majority 
of those affected.69 The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women recognized, in its general recommendation No. 19 (1992), 
67  There is vast international jurisprudence and literature affirming the complementary 
application of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in times 
of armed conflict, international or internal, notwithstanding the possibility to derogate 
from certain civil and political rights, subject to strict requirements, in emergency 
situations. The application of both bodies of law in armed conflict has been addressed 
and confirmed, e.g., through State practice and by human rights mechanisms, as well as 
by the International Court of Justice in its Advisory Opinions on the Legality of the Threat 
or Use of Nuclear Weapons of 1996 and the Legal Consequences of the Construction of 
a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory of 2004. The Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women contains provisions covering both women’s 
civil and political rights and their economic, social and cultural rights, and is applicable 
at all times. See Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, general 
recommendation No. 30 (2013) on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post-
conflict situations, paras. 2 and 19–24.
68  Rashida Manjoo and Calleigh McRaith, “Gender-based violence and justice in conflict 
and post-conflict areas”, Cornell International Law Journal , vol. 44, No. 11 (2011), 
pp. 11–12; and “Violence against women perpetrated and/or condoned by the State 
during times of armed conflict (1997-2000)” (E/CN.4/2001/73).
69  E/CN.4/2001/73; and Elisabeth Rehn and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Women, War, Peace: 
The Independent Experts’ Assessment on the Impact of Armed Conflict on Women and 
Women’s Role in Peace-Building , Progress of the World’s Women 2002, vol. 1 (United 
Nations Development Fund for Women, 2002).
93
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE93
that “wars, armed conflicts and the occupation of territories often lead to 
increased prostitution, trafficking in women and sexual assault of women, 
which require specific protective and punitive measures.” Both State and 
non-State actors commit this violence. With the intent of intimidating and 
humiliating the adversary, rape and sexual violence are also routinely 
used by all parties to conflicts as a tactic of war.70 Moreover, during 
conflict, domestic violence and sexual abuse also increase dramatically.71 
Violence against women both during conflict and post-conflict can be seen 
as a continuum of the discrimination women experience in peacetime. 
Conflict exacerbates pre-existing patterns of discrimination based on 
sex and put women and girls at heightened risk of sexual, physical and 
psychological violence. The underlying causes of violence both in peace 
and in conflict are the same: historically unequal power relations between 
men and women, systemic or structural causes such as gender-based 
discrimination and a patriarchal value system. In addition, conflict causes 
an acceptance of higher levels of violence, and in the post-conflict phase 
deeply rooted inequalities that existed before the conflict are aggravated.72  
Thus, the end of conflict does not translate into an end to the violence that 
women and girls endure. Women continue to suffer from the medical, 
physical, psychological and socioeconomic consequences of the violence 
suffered during conflict long after it has ended. The stigma associated with 
sexual violence is ever-present, in conflicts and in their aftermath. Violence 
against women and girls also spikes in post-conflict societies, owing to 
the general breakdown of the rule of law, the availability of small arms, 
the breakdown of social and family structures and the “normalization” of 
sexual violence as an additional element of pre-existing discrimination. 
70  Manjoo and McRaith, “Gender-based violence and justice in conflict and post-conflict 
areas”, p. 12. See also United Nations Security Council resolution 1820 (2008) (and 
subsequent resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)) recognizing sexual violence as 
a tactic of war.
71  Rehn and Sirleaf, Women, War, Peace , p. 11.
72  Niamh Reilly, Women’s Human Rights  (Polity Press, 2009), p. 98.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS94
94
Until the 1990s, wartime sexual violence was not prosecuted as an 
international crime, despite being prohibited under international 
humanitarian law.73 Sexual violence was viewed more as an attack 
against the honour of a woman or against morality than as a separate 
serious crime, e.g., the Fourth Geneva Convention expresses the need 
for the special protection of women “against any attack on their honour, 
in particular against rape, enforced prostitution or any form of indecent 
assault” (art. 27).74 Since the 1990s, international criminal jurisprudence 
has contributed enormously to clarifying the legal norms applicable to 
gender-based crimes during conflict. Both the International Criminal 
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal 
for Rwanda have stated in different landmark decisions that wartime rape 
and sexual violence can be considered as war crimes, crimes against 
humanity, acts of torture or constituent acts of genocide, as long as all the 
relevant elements of the crime are present.
73  Patricia Viseur Sellers, “The prosecution of sexual violence in conflict: the importance 
of human rights as means of interpretation”, pp. 6–9. Available from http://www2.
ohchr.org/english/issues/women/docs/Paper_Prosecution_of_Sexual_Violence.pdf 
(accessed 25 November 2013).
74  Common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which applies in both international and 
non-international armed conflict as customary law, prohibits violence to life and person, 
torture, the taking of hostages, outrages against personal dignity, in particular humiliating 
and degrading treatment, but does not explicitly mention rape and sexual violence. The 
list of “serious breaches” of the Geneva Conventions also does not specifically mention 
rape or sexual violence. The Additional Protocols of 1977 do specifically prohibit rape. 
See Reilly, Women’s Human Rights , p. 101.
95
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE95
international Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
Prosecutor  v. Akayesu , case No. ICTR-96-4-T, 2 September 1998: 
reconceptualization and broad definition of rape
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda made a significant 
contribution to the evolving jurisprudence on rape as a war crime 
by articulating a broad definition that squarely places rape on an 
equal footing with other crimes against humanity. Its definition 
reconceptualizes rape as an attack on an individual woman’s security 
of person, not on the abstract notion of virtue and not as a taint on 
an entire family’s or village’s honour. According to the Tribunal, “rape 
is a form of aggression and … the central elements of the crime of 
rape cannot be captured in a mechanical description of objects and 
body parts.” The Tribunal defined rape as a “physical invasion of a 
sexual nature, committed on a person under circumstances which are 
coercive.” In addition, it defined sexual violence to include forced 
nudity, firmly establishing that acts of sexual violence are not limited to 
those involving penetration or even sexual contact.
The Akayesu  decision also recognized for the first time that acts 
of sexual violence can be prosecuted as constituent elements of a 
genocidal campaign. Jean-Paul Akayesu, the former mayor of Taba, 
was convicted of genocide for knowing, instigating, aiding and 
abetting the rapes and sexual violence in the community, specifically 
targeting Tutsi women, as part of a genocidal campaign that intended 
to destroy the Tutsi group as a whole.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS96
96
international Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
Prosecutor  v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Rodomir Kova č and Zoran Vukovi ć, 
case No. IT-96-23/T and IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement of 22 February 
2001: elements of rape
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia also 
found that rape was a constituent offence of crimes against humanity 
in the Kunarac  case in 2001. This case concerned a campaign in the 
municipality of Foca which aimed to rid the area of Muslims, especially 
through targeting Muslim women. Muslim women were held at various 
detention centres and subjected to systematic rape. 
The case was significant in offering the following definition of the 
elements of rape: “the sexual penetration, however slight: (a) of the 
vagina or anus of the victim by the penis of the perpetrator or any 
other object used by the perpetrator; or (b) of the mouth of the victim 
by the penis of the perpetrator; where such sexual penetration occurs 
without the consent of the victim. Consent for this purpose must be 
consent given voluntarily, as a result of the victim’s free will, assessed 
in the context of the surrounding circumstances. The mens rea  is the 
intention to effect this sexual penetration, and the knowledge that it 
occurs without the consent of the victim” (para. 460).
This approach of the Trial Chamber was affirmed on appeal.   
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court builds on this 
jurisprudence, defining a wide range of gender-based crimes as war 
crimes and crimes against humanity.75 It also includes gender-sensitive 
provisions such as the establishment of a victim and witness protection unit 
75  Its article 7 (1) (g) lists rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, 
enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity as 
a crime against humanity; its article 8 (2) (b) (xxii) lists rape, sexual slavery, enforced 
prostitution, forced pregnancy ... enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual violence 
as a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions; and its article 8 (e) (vi) lists rape, sexual 
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy ... enforced sterilization or any other form of 
sexual violence as a serious violation of article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions. 
See Viseur Sellers, “The prosecution of sexual violence in conflict”, for further analysis.
97
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE97
within the Court, the provision of counselling and other necessary services 
to victims of gender-based violence, and the appointment of legal advisers 
with gender expertise and of female judges and personnel.
The adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1325 (2000) on 
women, peace and security also represents a landmark in recognizing 
and addressing conflict-related gender-based violence. The resolution 
recognizes the devastating impact of conflict on women and girls, and 
reaffirms the need to implement fully existing international humanitarian 
and human rights law obligations protecting the rights of women and girls 
during conflict. It focuses on four main areas: prevention, participation, 
protection, and relief and recovery. It also urges States to take special 
measures to protect women and girls from gender-based violence during 
conflict, and end impunity by prosecuting those responsible for crimes 
during conflict, including gender-based crimes. Furthermore, the resolution 
calls for increased representation of women at all levels of decision-making, 
and in all mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of 
conflicts, and for gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations.
In follow-up resolution 1820 (2008), the Security Council recognizes 
that sexual violence may impede the restoration of international peace 
and security and is often used as a tactic of war. It stresses that sexual 
violence should be excluded from any amnesty provisions in a peace 
process and that equal access to justice should be ensured for victims of 
sexual violence. The subsequent follow-up resolutions have focused on 
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence, and called 
for, inter alia, the appointment of a special representative on sexual 
violence in conflict, a team of experts and women protection advisers to 
advise Governments and peacekeeping missions in dealing with sexual 
violence. Global indicators to track the implementation of resolution 1325 
(2000) have been developed, as well as new monitoring and reporting 
mechanisms for conflict-related sexual violence. 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS98
98
Women’s participation in peace processes and their role as agents of change
Despite the challenges that the post-conflict vacuum poses for the enjoyment 
of women’s human rights, it can also be viewed as an opportunity for 
transformation—to change the societal structures and norms in place 
before the conflict which contributed to the violence against women in 
the first place. To ensure this transformation, it is imperative to take into 
account women’s various roles and diverse experiences of conflict, not 
only as victims but as combatants, as part of organized civil society and 
as human rights defenders, as members of resistance movements, and as 
active agents in both formal and informal peace processes.76
The Security Council, in its resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent 
resolutions, and the Secretary-General, in his reports on women, 
peace and security, and sexual violence in conflict, recognize women’s 
role in peacebuilding efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000) referred to the 
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women and children, while 
at the same time acknowledging that women are not mere victims of 
conflict, but also active agents with an important role to play in conflict 
prevention, peacekeeping initiatives, conflict resolution and peacebuilding 
efforts.77 This was an important departure from references to women as 
victims or vulnerable groups. United Nations Security Council resolution 
1889 (2009) reiterates the key role of women in preventing conflict and in 
76  Reilly, Women’s Human Rights , pp. 93–98; and Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women, general recommendation No. 30 (2013), paras. 36 
and 42. Gender-sensitive transitional justice mechanisms and reparations can play an 
important role in post-conflict transition, as can the inclusion of women at all stages of 
the peace process/negotiations and all levels of political decision-making post-conflict, 
taking into account their different roles and experiences.
77  Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 
1960 (2010), 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013); and the reports of the Secretary-General on 
women, peace and security (S/2002/1154, S/2004/814, S/2005/636, S/2006/770, 
S/2007/567, S/2008/622, S/2009/465, S/2010/498, S/2011/598, S/2012/732, 
S/2013/525), on women’s participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354–S/2010/466, 
A/67/499-S/2012/746), on sexual violence in conflict and implementation of 
the relevant resolutions (S/2009/362, S/2010/173, A/65/592–S/2010/604, 
A/66/657–S/2012/33, A/67/792–S/2013/149, S/2014/181). Note that Security 
Council resolutions are legally binding on United Nations Member States, which makes 
resolution 1325 (2000) and follow-up resolutions powerful advocacy tools.
99
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE99
peacebuilding, and urges the participation of women in all phases of the 
peace process, including in conflict resolution and post-conflict planning. 
It emphasizes the development of strategies that address the needs of 
women and girls in post-conflict situations, including access to education, 
health services and justice, and gender equality. The resolution also urges 
Member States to ensure gender mainstreaming in all aspects of post-
conflict peacebuilding and recovery.
Some positive effect of implementing resolution 1325 (2000) can already 
be seen on the ground. By June 2012, 37 States had adopted national 
action plans on women, peace and security, and a number of others were 
developing such plans.78 Importantly, the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women has requested States to include compliance 
with Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security in their 
reports to it, adding to the monitoring of their implementation, since all 
areas of concern expressed in the resolutions reflect binding provisions of 
the Convention.79
Despite these advances and reform already in place, considerable 
challenges with implementing these standards remain. The 
Secretary-General’s 2012 report on conflict-related sexual violence 
(A/66/657–S/2012/33) illustrates these very well. Gender-based 
violence in those settings remains rampant, and women’s access to justice, 
decision-making and services remains limited. The Secretary-General’s 
previous reports also underlined the remaining challenges and obstacles 
to women’s meaningful participation in peace processes, and came up 
with comprehensive recommendations and action plans for United Nations 
agencies in cooperation with other stakeholders to be able to address 
these challenges more effectively (A/65/354–S/2010/466). Recent 
civil society reports have also pointed out that women’s experiences of 
conflict and post-conflict continue to reveal exclusion, marginalization and 
78  Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2012/732).
79  Reilly, Women’s Human Rights , p. 113; and Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women, general recommendation No. 30 (2013), paras. 25–28. See also its 
general recommendation No. 23 (1997) on women in political and public life.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS100
100
limited decision-making power.80 However, the global indicators set up by 
Security Council resolution 1899 (2009) as well as the Security Council’s 
request to the Secretary-General to ensure that relevant United Nations 
bodies, in cooperation with Member States and civil society, collect 
gender-disaggregated data were designed to promote a more effective 
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In addition, resolution 1960 
(2010) establishes a mechanism that allows the Secretary-General to list 
parties “that are credibly suspected of committing or being responsible 
for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations of 
armed conflict” on the Security Council’s agenda. It also requests parties 
to armed conflict to make specific, time-bound commitments to combat 
sexual violence, and the Secretary-General to track and monitor the 
implementation of these commitments. Finally, it requests the Secretary-
General to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on 
conflict-related sexual violence. 
These remaining challenges highlight the need for a comprehensive 
approach. The interrelatedness and interdependence of human rights 
require attention to be paid to all human rights of women and girls in 
conflict and post-conflict, both civil and political rights, as well as social, 
economic and cultural rights. The same applies to transitional justice 
reforms: securing all human rights of women and girls is important for 
full post-conflict transformation. For example, the fulfilment of rights such 
as economic and social rights is imperative for the eradication of gender-
based violence and for women to be able to take on more active roles 
in peacebuilding. Extreme poverty and unequal access to land, property, 
education and services have been mentioned as some of the reasons 
for women’s low participation in peace processes and in politics, and 
structural inequalities including socioeconomic ones are often raised as root 
causes for gender-based violence. Thus, treaties such as the Convention 
80  Kavitha Suthanthiraraj and Cristina Ayo, Promoting Women’s Participation in Conflict 
and Post Conflict Societies: How Women Worldwide are Making and Building Peace  
(Global Action to Prevent War, NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, 
and Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom), pp. 82–94; Global 
Network of Women Peacebuilders, “Women count: Security Council resolution 1325 – 
civil society monitoring report” (October 2010).
101
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE101
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights have an 
important role to play in ensuring women’s rights both during conflict and 
during post-conflict transitions.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS102
102
United Nations Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security: key provisions
Resolution 1325 (2000) Resolution 1820 (2008) Resolution 1888 (2009) Resolution 1889 (2009) Resolution 1960 (2010)
• Calls on all parties 
to armed conflict to 
respect international law 
applicable to the rights 
and protection of women 
and girls  (para. 9) and 
to take special measures 
to protect women and 
girls from gender-based 
violence, particularly rape 
and other forms of sexual 
abuse, and all other forms 
of violence in situations of 
armed conflict (para. 10). 
It also calls on all parties 
to respect the civilian and 
humanitarian character 
of refugee camps and 
settlements, and to take 
into account the particular 
needs of women and girls, 
including in their design 
(para. 12).• Recognizes sexual 
violence as a tactic of 
war (para. 1) and affirms 
that sexual violence can 
constitute a war crime, a 
crime against humanity 
or a constitutive act of 
genocide  (para. 4).
• Seeks to strengthen 
the protection of women  
from sexual violence, 
by demanding that 
all parties to armed 
conflict immediately and 
completely cease all acts 
of sexual violence against 
civilians (para. 2). It also 
demands that all parties 
take appropriate measures 
such as: enforcing military 
disciplinary measures and 
upholding the principle of 
command responsibility, 
training troops on the 
prohibition of all forms of 
sexual violence, debunking 
myths that fuel sexual• Calls for the 
establishment of several 
mechanisms  within the 
United Nations system, 
including the appointment 
of a special representative  
to provide leadership 
and coordinate efforts 
with Governments, as 
well as with all parties to 
armed conflict and civil 
society to address, at both 
headquarters and country 
level, sexual violence in 
armed conflict (para. 4). 
It calls on the Secretary-
General to identify and 
deploy a team of experts  
to situations of particular 
concern with respect to 
sexual violence in armed 
conflict. This team, with 
the consent of the host 
Government, will assist 
national authorities to 
prevent and address sexual 
violence (para. 8). • Urges Member States, 
international and regional 
organizations to take 
further measures to improve 
women’s participation 
during all stages of peace 
processes , particularly in 
conflict resolution, post-
conflict planning and 
peacebuilding (para. 1). It 
also calls on the Secretary-
General to develop a 
strategy to increase 
the number of women 
appointed as special 
representatives and special 
envoys, and to increase 
women’s participation in 
United Nations political, 
peacebuilding and 
peacekeeping missions 
(para. 4).• Establishes a mechanism  
that allows the Secretary-
General to list parties  that 
are credibly suspected 
of committing or being 
responsible for patterns of 
rape and other forms of 
sexual violence in situations 
of armed conflict. It also 
expresses its intention 
to use this list as a basis 
for more focused United 
Nations engagement with 
those parties, including 
measures in accordance 
with the procedures of 
the relevant sanctions 
committees (para. 3).
• Requests parties to armed 
conflict to make specific, 
time-bound commitments  
to combat sexual violence, 
and the Secretary-General 
to track and monitor 
implementation of these 
commitments (paras. 5 
and 6).
103
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE103
United Nations Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security: key provisions
Resolution 1325 (2000) Resolution 1820 (2008) Resolution 1888 (2009) Resolution 1889 (2009) Resolution 1960 (2010)
• Calls for increased 
representation and 
participation of women in 
decision-making institutions  
and mechanisms for the 
prevention, management 
and resolution of conflict 
(paras. 1 and 2), urges 
the Secretary-General to 
appoint more women as 
special representatives 
and envoys (para. 3), and 
expresses the Security 
Council’s willingness 
to consult local and 
international women’s 
groups (para. 15).
• Seeks to expand the 
role and contribution of 
women in United Nations 
field-based operations , 
especially among military 
observers, civilian 
police, human rights and 
humanitarian personnel 
(para. 4), and incorporate 
a gender perspective into 
peacekeeping operations 
and, where appropriate, 
include a gender 
component (para. 5).violence, vetting armed 
and security forces to 
take into account past 
rape and other forms 
of sexual violence, and 
evacuating women and 
children at risk to safety 
(para. 3). It also requests 
the Secretary-General and 
United Nations agencies 
to develop effective 
mechanisms for protecting 
United Nations-managed 
refugee and internally 
displaced persons camps 
(para. 10).It also requests that 
women’s protection 
advisers  be identified 
among existing gender 
advisers and human 
rights protection units 
within United Nations 
peacekeeping operations 
for the protection of women 
and children from rape 
and other sexual violence 
(para. 12).
• Urges the inclusion of 
sexual violence issues 
in peace negotiation  
agendas and peace 
processes (para. 17). It 
also urges the Secretary-
General, Member States 
and the heads of regional 
organizations to take 
measures to increase the 
representation of women 
in mediation processes 
and decision-making 
processes with regard 
to conflict resolution and 
peacebuilding (para. 16).• Urges Member 
States to ensure gender 
mainstreaming  in all post-
conflict peacebuilding 
and recovery processes 
(para. 8) and to ensure that 
women’s empowerment 
is taken into account 
during post-conflict 
needs assessments and 
planning, and factored 
into funding disbursements 
and programme activities 
(para. 9).• Requests the Secretary-
General to establish 
monitoring, analysis and 
reporting arrangements  
on sexual violence in 
conflict. It also encourages 
the Secretary-General 
to engage with United 
Nations actors, national 
institutions, civil society 
organizations, health-
care service providers 
and women’s groups to 
enhance data collection 
and analysis of incidents, 
trends, and patterns of 
rape and other forms of 
sexual violence to assist 
the Council’s consideration 
of appropriate actions 
(para. 8).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS104
104
United Nations Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security: key provisions
Resolution 1325 (2000) Resolution 1820 (2008) Resolution 1888 (2009) Resolution 1889 (2009) Resolution 1960 (2010)
• Calls on all actors 
involved to adopt a 
gender perspective , 
including taking into 
account the special 
needs of women and 
girls during repatriation 
and resettlement and 
for rehabilitation, 
reintegration and post-
conflict reconstruction  
(para. 8 (a)), as well as the 
different needs of female 
ex-combatants and their 
dependants (para. 13). 
All actors involved should 
also adopt measures that 
support local women’s 
peace initiatives and 
indigenous processes 
for conflict resolution, 
and involve women 
in all implementation 
mechanisms of peace 
agreements (para. 8 (b)).• Calls for greater 
accountability  by stressing 
the need for the exclusion 
of sexual violence crimes 
from amnesty provisions in 
conflict resolution processes 
and calls on Member 
States to prosecute persons 
responsible for such acts 
and to ensure access to 
justice for victims of sexual 
violence, particularly 
women and girls (para. 4). 
It also affirms its intention to 
consider enacting Security 
Council measures such as 
State sanctions against 
parties to armed conflict 
that commit sexual violence 
(para. 5).• Requests the Secretary-
General to ensure more 
systematic reporting  
on incidents of trends, 
emerging patterns of 
attack and early warning 
indicators of the use of 
sexual violence in armed 
conflict (para. 24).
• Requests the Secretary-
General to submit 
annual reports  on 
the implementation of 
resolution 1820 (2008), 
including information on 
parties to armed conflict 
that are credibly suspected 
of committing patterns 
of rape or other forms of 
sexual violence (para. 27).• Encourages Member 
States, in consultation with 
civil society, to design 
concrete strategies to 
address women’s and 
girls’ needs and priorities , 
including support for 
physical security and better 
socioeconomic conditions, 
through education, income-
generating activities, 
access to basic services,  
in particular health 
services, gender-responsive 
law enforcement and 
access to justice, as well 
as enhancing capacity to 
engage in public decision-
making at all levels  
(para. 10).
• Encourages the 
Peacebuilding Commission 
and Peacebuilding Support 
Office to ensure the 
mobilization of resources  
for advancing gender 
equality and women’s 
empowerment as an 
integral part of post-conflict 
peacebuilding (para. 14).• Intents, when adopting 
or renewing targeted 
sanctions in situations of 
armed conflict, to consider 
including designation 
criteria pertaining to acts 
of rape and other forms of 
sexual violence  (para. 7).
• Welcomes the work 
of gender advisers and 
the appointment of 
more women protection 
advisers to peacekeeping 
missions, and notes their 
potential contribution 
in the framework of the 
monitoring, analysis and 
reporting arrangements 
(para. 10).
105
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE105
United Nations Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security: key provisions
Resolution 1325 (2000) Resolution 1820 (2008) Resolution 1888 (2009) Resolution 1889 (2009) Resolution 1960 (2010)
• Calls for the political 
participation of women in 
post-conflict reconstruction 
efforts , including through 
increased representation 
of women in the institutions 
and mechanisms of conflict 
resolution at the national 
level (para. 1) and the 
adoption of measures 
for the protection of and 
respect for the human 
rights of women and girls, 
particularly as they relate 
to the constitution, the 
electoral system, the police 
and the judiciary (para. 
8 (c)).• Requests the Secretary-
General to develop 
effective guidelines 
and strategies to 
enhance United Nations 
peacekeeping operations 
to protect civilians, 
including women and girls, 
from all forms of sexual 
violence (para. 9).  
It also calls for training 
programmes for 
peacekeeping and 
humanitarian staff  to help 
them prevent, recognize 
and respond to sexual 
violence (para. 6).
• Stresses preventive 
action  by strengthening 
efforts to implement the 
policy of zero tolerance 
of sexual exploitation and 
abuse in United Nations 
peacekeeping operations 
(para. 7).• Encourages States 
to increase assistance 
to victims of sexual 
violence , including health 
care, psychosocial 
support, legal assistance 
and socioeconomic 
reintegration services 
(para. 13). It also 
encourages national 
and local leaders, 
including traditional and 
religious leaders, to play 
a more active role in 
sensitizing communities 
on sexual violence to 
avoid marginalization 
and stigmatization of 
victims, to assist with their 
social reintegration and 
to combat a culture of 
impunity for these crimes 
(para. 15).• Concerning monitoring 
and reporting , requests the 
Secretary-General to submit 
a set of global indicators 
to monitor implementation 
of resolution 1325 (2000) 
(para. 17) and include in 
an annual report progress 
in the implementation of 
this resolution (para. 18). 
Additionally, it requests 
the Secretary-General 
to ensure that relevant 
United Nations bodies, 
in cooperation with 
Member States and civil 
society, collect gender-
disaggregated data 
(para. 6). It also asks 
the Secretary-General 
to present a report on 
addressing women’s 
participation and inclusion 
in peacebuilding and 
planning in the aftermath 
of conflict (para. 19).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS106
106
United Nations Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security: key provisions
Resolution 1325 (2000) Resolution 1820 (2008) Resolution 1888 (2009) Resolution 1889 (2009) Resolution 1960 (2010)
• Emphasizes the 
responsibility of all States 
to end impunity and to 
prosecute those responsible  
for genocide, crimes 
against humanity and war 
crimes, including those 
relating to sexual and other 
violence against women 
and girls (para. 11).
• Requests the Secretary-
General to provide 
Member States with 
training  guidelines and 
materials on the protection, 
rights and the particular 
needs of women, as well 
as on the importance 
of involving women in 
all peacekeeping and 
peacebuilding measures 
(para. 6) and urges 
Member States to increase 
their financial and other 
resources for gender-
sensitive training efforts 
(para. 7).• Urges all parties, 
including Member States, 
United Nations entities 
and financial institutions, 
to support the development 
and strengthening of the 
capacities of national 
institutions, in particular 
of judicial and health 
systems, and of local civil 
society networks to provide 
sustainable assistance to 
victims  of sexual violence 
in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations (para. 13).
• Seeks to increase 
women’s representation 
in peace operations  
by deploying a higher 
percentage of women 
peacekeepers or police 
(para. 8). It also urges the 
Secretary-General and his 
special envoys to invite 
women to participate in 
discussions pertinent to the 
prevention and resolution 
of conflict, the maintenance 
of peace and security, and 
post-conflict peacebuilding 
(para. 12).
107
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE107
Women’s economic, social and cultural rights and conflict
Women’s particular vulnerability to social and economic deprivation 
worsens in conflict and post-conflict situations, as conflict exacerbates 
gender-based discrimination and is accompanied by the loss of livelihoods 
and the destruction of family and community structures.81 Former 
women combatants may experience discrimination, since in some cases 
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes or other 
assistance to former combatants exclude women. Women who have been 
combatants also experience more difficulties reintegrating and getting 
back to civilian life than male ex-combatants, since they defied traditional 
gender roles by becoming combatants, which is not easily accepted by 
their families and communities. Discriminatory laws might prevent women 
and women-headed households from owning, inheriting, occupying or 
accessing land or other forms of property, or prevent them from obtaining 
credit or loans without a male guarantor. Other serious challenges are the 
lack of appropriate institutional responses to gender-based violence, such 
as health care, counselling or shelters, as well as inadequate access to 
education or employment opportunities. 
Special attention should be paid to the judicial enforcement of economic, 
social and cultural rights in transitional contexts, especially women’s economic, 
social and cultural rights given their increased vulnerability in conflict and 
post-conflict. Rule-of-law reforms such as the review of key legislation and 
constitution writing, peace agreements, transitional justice mechanisms and 
reparations programmes or other post-conflict reform should take into account 
violations of women’s economic, social and cultural rights and civil and 
political rights equally, also because these rights are intrinsically linked. This 
will secure a comprehensive and lasting post-conflict transformation, and an 
environment where women fully enjoy their fundamental rights.
81  See the Montréal Principles on Women’s Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and 
the Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE), the International Network for 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ESCR.net) and International Women’s Rights 
Action Watch IWRAW Asia-Pacific, “A primer on women’s economic, social, and cultural 
rights”. Available from www.escr-net.org/usr_doc/Primer_WESCR_English_rev1.pdf 
(accessed 27 November 2013). Today, women represent 70 per cent of the 1.2 billion 
people living in poverty worldwide.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS108
108
Women and children also make up the majority of the world’s refugees and 
persons internally displaced by conflict, who are particularly exposed to 
gender-based violence and threats to their personal security and also face 
discrimination in accessing food, water, housing, education, adequate 
medical care and sanitation.82 In addition, women’s right to adequate 
housing is particularly threatened during conflict, mass displacement or 
forced relocation when forced evictions tend to happen and affect women 
disproportionally.83
During conflict women often become de facto heads of households and 
thus responsible for everything, from taking care of the children, their 
education, access to food, water and basic services, to generating an 
income. A positive aspect of this is that these responsibilities provide 
women with an opportunity to make decisions regarding the running of 
the household and the cultivation of land which they would not normally 
have. However, studies show a reduction in women’s participation in 
public life and decision-making post-conflict, suggesting that women 
are often forced back into their traditional domestic roles. Women and 
women-headed households experience several obstacles in realizing their 
rights in transition.84
The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has underscored, 
in its general comments Nos. 15 (2002) on the right to water and 14 
(2000) on the right to the highest attainable standard of health, that 
certain core obligations of the State are non-derogable and thus apply in 
all situations including conflict, internal strife or emergencies. According 
to the Committee, States have a core obligation to ensure safe access 
without discrimination at all times to the minimum essential amount of 
water. Other non-derogable, core obligations include ensuring, without 
any discrimination and especially for vulnerable or marginalized groups, 
access to health facilities, goods and services, to minimum essential food, 
82  See E/CN.4/1996/52, para. 46.
83  See Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, general comment No. 7 (1997) 
on the right to adequate housing: forced evictions; and “Women and adequate housing” 
(E/CN.4/2003/55).
84  E/CN.4/2003/55.
109
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE109
basic shelter, housing and sanitation, to essential drugs, and reproductive, 
maternal (prenatal as well as postnatal) and child health care. Its general 
comment No. 18 (2005) on the right to work explains that access to 
employment, especially for marginalized groups, as well as the obligation 
to avoid any measure that results in discrimination or unequal treatment in 
the private or public sectors of disadvantaged individuals or groups, are 
core (non-derogable) obligations of the State.
Importantly, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women also guarantees women’s access to health care and 
services (art. 12), training and education (art. 10), and employment 
opportunities (art. 11). The Convention also grants special protection to 
those who have been displaced or rendered stateless or have become 
refugees or asylum seekers by providing for women’s right to a nationality, 
movement and choice of domicile (arts. 9 and 15.4). 
G. WOMEN’S ACCESS TO JUSTiCE
Ensuring women’s access to justice requires that women enjoy their right 
to equality before the law, that procedures are in place to guarantee non-
discriminatory access to justice and that women have effective access to 
remedies when their rights have been violated. These rights are provided 
for under international human rights law, including articles 2.3 (right to 
a remedy) and 26 (equality before the law) of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights. The right to an effective remedy is relevant 
for the realization of all human rights, and is to be enjoyed on the basis 
of equality, without discrimination of any form such as on the basis of sex 
or gender. The Human Rights Committee, in its general comment No. 31 
(2004), explained that for the right to an effective remedy to be fulfilled, 
reparation has to be provided to the victim of a human rights violation. 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women requires State parties to establish legal protection of the rights 
of women on an equal basis with men and to ensure through competent 
national tribunals and other public institutions the effective protection of 
women against any act of discrimination (art. 2 (c)).
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS110
110
Significant progress has been made globally with regard to revising laws 
that discriminate against women and drafting constitutions that incorporate 
guarantees of equality and non-discrimination. A legal and constitutional 
framework which guarantees women’s rights at the national level is 
fundamental for women to access justice. However, discriminatory laws 
remain an issue in several countries and the implementation of laws even 
more so.85 Laws that are seemingly gender-neutral can have discriminatory 
effects in practice, and laws that guarantee equality between women and 
men or women’s rights may not be applied, which means they do little for 
the advancement of women. In addition, women who suffer violence or 
who work in the informal sector are in many cases not protected by the 
law. Extending the protection of the law to include, for instance, sexual and 
gender-based violence, work in the informal sector and migrant women is 
essential.86 The obligation of States to ensure that laws are applied and 
have an actual impact on women’s lives is also important to emphasize. 
Justice systems reflect society’s power imbalances, including those that 
disadvantage women. Both social and institutional barriers inhibit women’s 
access to justice. Social barriers include the lack of knowledge of their 
rights, illiteracy, lack of information and dependence on male relatives 
for assistance and resources. Institutional barriers such as geographical 
distance, suitable facilities, infrastructure and language have to be taken 
into account to ensure access to justice for rural, minority or indigenous 
women or women with disabilities.87
In addition to these barriers, women face indifference or gender bias and 
stereotyping by State authorities such as the police and the judiciary when 
it comes to investigating crimes committed against them. 
85  “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, Gabriela 
Knaul” (A/HRC/17/30), paras. 27–36; and Progress of the World’s Women 2011–
2012 , pp. 28–31.
86  Progress of the World’s Women 2011–2012 , pp. 32–37.
87  Ibid., pp. 52–55.
111
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE111
Stereotyping by the judiciary
Vertido  v. Philippines  (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women, communication No. 18/2008, Views adopted on 
16 July 2010)
The Committee considered gender stereotypes in a case of rape, 
emphasizing “that stereotyping affects women’s right to a fair and just 
trial and that the judiciary must take caution not to create inflexible 
standards of what women or girls should be or what they should 
have done when confronted with a situation of rape based merely 
on preconceived notions of what defines a rape victim or a victim of 
gender-based violence, in general.” According to the Committee, it 
was clear from the judgement that the assessment of the credibility 
of the complainant’s version of events was influenced by a number 
of stereotypes, the complainant in this situation not having followed 
what was expected from a rational and “ideal victim” or what the 
judge considered to be the rational and ideal response of a woman 
in a rape situation. In addition to ordering the State party to pay 
adequate compensation, the Committee ordered the State to “ensure 
that all legal procedures in cases involving crimes of rape and other 
sexual offences are impartial and fair, and not affected by prejudices 
or stereotypical gender notions.” To achieve this, a wide range of 
measures were ordered by the Committee, targeted at the legal system, 
to improve the judicial handling of rape cases, as well as training and 
education to change discriminatory attitudes towards women.
The Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers has 
expressed concern that women’s poverty and the entrenched economic 
inequality between men and women continue to seriously hamper 
women’s access to justice. The traditional denial of women’s autonomy 
to make decisions about their lives, their lack of access to education and 
information about rights, their minimal participation in decision-making 
and lack of access to property, land and equal work opportunities, are 
all factors contributing to the so-called feminization of poverty and, 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS112
112
consequently, to women’s lack of access to justice.88 An essential aspect of 
the State obligation to ensure the right to access to justice for women is to 
train judges and lawyers in women’s rights and gender sensitivity, to raise 
awareness or organize training to inform women and communities of their 
legal rights and to ensure that the provision of legal aid and the availability 
of effective protection mechanisms such as shelters and counselling for 
victims are accessible to all women without discrimination. Ensuring 
adequate representation of women in the judiciary is also important. The 
Human Rights Committee specified in its general comment No. 28 (2000) 
that State parties should provide information on “whether measures are 
taken to ensure women equal access to legal aid, in particular in family 
matters.”
Right to legal assistance
Airey  v. Ireland  (European Court of Human Rights, application No. 
6289/73, Judgement of 9 October 1979)
The claimant sought a judicially ordered separation from her physically 
abusive husband, as she was unable to conclude a separation 
agreement with him. However, she was unable to obtain such an order 
since she could not afford a solicitor and legal aid was not available. 
The European Court of Human Rights held that this was a violation 
of her right to access a court for the determination of her civil rights 
and obligations (art. 6). Citing international law and the European 
Convention’s intention, the Court stated that remedies must be effective 
not illusory, noting that many civil and political rights had social and 
economic implications involving positive obligations. Accordingly, 
there is a right to legal assistance if legal assistance is indispensable 
to have effective access to the courts.
88  A/HRC/17/30, paras. 20–26.
113
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE113
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 
explained, in its general recommendation No. 28 (2010), that “States 
parties must further ensure that women have recourse to affordable, 
accessible and timely remedies, with legal aid and assistance as 
necessary, to be settled in a fair hearing by a competent and independent 
court or tribunal, where appropriate.” Furthermore, the Basic Principles 
and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of 
Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations 
of International Humanitarian Law call for “proper assistance to victims 
seeking access to justice” including legal aid and ensuring adequate, 
effective and prompt remedies for victims of serious or gross violations 
(General Assembly resolution 60/147). In addition, the due diligence 
obligation of States to prosecute, punish and compensate for human 
rights violations committed by non-State actors has also become a well-
recognized international norm. States should ensure that women victims 
of human rights violations have access to immediate means of redress 
and reparation, that perpetrators are prosecuted and punished, and that 
mechanisms for this are accessible to women. The obligation to provide 
adequate reparations includes ensuring the rights of women to access both 
criminal and civil remedies and the establishment of effective protection, 
support and rehabilitation services for survivors of violence.
The Special Rapporteur on violence against women puts forward the 
idea of “transformative reparations” in her 2010 report on reparations 
for women subjected to violence (A/HRC/14/22). Given the disparate 
and differentiated impact violence has on women and different groups 
of women, there is a need for specific measures of redress to meet their 
specific needs and priorities. According to the Special Rapporteur, the focus 
of reparations should be on fairness towards the victims of human rights 
violations and on “repairing” the damage done, not only on returning the 
women to the circumstances they were in before they suffered the violence. 
Since the violence women experience is a continuum of structural and 
systemic discrimination women face in peacetime, during conflict and 
post-conflict, its structural and systemic causes need to be addressed by 
reparations aiming to transform these conditions. She outlines what such 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS114
114
reparations should entail: restitution and compensation, rehabilitation and 
reintegration, symbolic recognition, guarantees of non-repetition. Complex 
reparations schemes, such as those providing a variety of benefits, can 
better address the needs of female beneficiaries and have transformative 
potential, both in practical, material terms and in terms of boosting their self-
confidence and esteem. It is paramount that the women themselves should 
have a meaningful part in all stages of developing a reparation programme. 
Due diligence obligations of the State
Jessica Lenahan (Gonzales)  v. United States of America  (Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights, decision of 21 July 2011)
In 1999, Jessica Lenahan’s daughters were abducted by her former 
husband and killed after the police repeatedly refused to enforce her 
domestic violence restraining order against him. Ms. Lenahan brought 
a constitutional claim against the police to the United States Supreme 
Court, which found that the police had no constitutional duty to enforce 
her restraining order, thereby leaving her without a remedy.
The Inter-American Commission reiterated the right of women victims 
of violence to access judicial protection. Finding that the investigations 
into the deaths of the three children were inadequate, the Commission 
also emphasized the victim’s right to access information and her right 
to truth. The Commission underlined that investigations have to be 
serious, prompt, thorough and impartial, and must be conducted in 
accordance with international standards. Furthermore, the Commission 
addressed the meaning of the State obligation to act with due diligence 
to prevent, investigate, sanction and offer remedies for violations of 
women’s human rights by private actors, including the duty of the 
State to organize the structure of the State, including the laws, public 
policy and the judicial system, so that it is capable of adequately and 
effectively preventing and responding to violations of women’s rights 
such as sexual and gender-based violence, including by effectively 
implementing restraining orders.
115
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE115
In some countries, issues related to women’s rights have been given little 
importance and have always been resolved informally, by alternative 
or local mechanisms. There may be parallel legal orders that are not 
sanctioned by the State or formally recognized State legal orders that are 
plural, i.e., combining informal (e.g., traditional, religious or customary) 
and formal mechanisms of justice.89 This means that different legal orders 
may coexist and even overlap.
The Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers has 
drawn attention to the problems of informal justice systems in relation 
to women’s rights to access to justice and to an effective remedy. For 
instance, she has highlighted cases of gender-based violence in which 
staff of the public prosecution service pressured victims into dropping 
their charges and resolving the situation through conciliation or mediation  
(A/HRC/17/30/Add.3). 
The Special Rapporteur on violence against women has also commented 
on informal justice mechanisms or alternative dispute mechanisms in her 
country mission reports. Her country visits have revealed that in many 
countries where the formal justice system exists in parallel with traditional or 
customary systems for dispute resolution, as well as with religious systems 
in some cases, the formal justice system is weak and often inaccessible 
to women. In Somalia for instance, there is a complex interrelationship 
between customary, religious and formal dispute settlement. Clan interests 
often take precedence over the interests of individual victims and families 
choose to reconcile through the customary system instead of seeking 
redress for victims. This leads to women victims of rape being forced 
to marry the rapist, following the ruling of male village elders applying 
customary practices (A/HRC/20/16/Add.3). In Ghana, traditional 
authorities, such as tribal chiefs in many rural areas, rule over issues 
and disputes regarding land and property rights, as well as matters 
involving “supernatural interference”, including allegations of witchcraft. 
Women who are accused of practising witchcraft are ostracized by their 
communities and displaced as a result of these allegations, often violently 
89  Progress of the World’s Women 2011–2012 , pp. 67–68.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS116
116
driven away, physically assaulted or even murdered (A/HRC/7/6/
Add.3). In Afghanistan, sharia law, customary law, the formal, secular 
legal system and international law exist in parallel. The Special Rapporteur 
found that sharia law and tribal customs often get mixed up, and practices 
that would violate Islamic teachings are applied at local level, such as 
child marriage, bad, denial of the rights of widows and inheritance rights 
of women. Local councils ( shura  or jirga), composed of locally influential 
men, mediate cases including those related to women’s rights and violence 
against women. Their decisions are binding and arguably “inherently 
discriminatory against women” (E/CN.4/2006/61/Add.5).
It is the responsibility of States to ensure that, if informal systems or mechanisms 
of justice like reconciliation are used, these comply with international human 
rights standards. In practice, however, research has shown that informal 
justice mechanisms often discriminate against women, and that women are 
excluded from the decision-making processes when their cases are being 
reconciled and decided upon. Marriage, divorce, access to land, property 
and violence against women are all examples of cases affecting women’s 
rights that are often handled through reconciliation or other informal justice 
mechanisms.90 Furthermore, research has demonstrated that, in cases of 
intrafamily violence, reconciliation is inadvisable. The parties to the process 
do not have equal bargaining positions and, according to the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights, in a number of countries it is clear that the 
agreements reached in the framework of mediation compound the physical 
and emotional risks for women. Generally, the assailant does not honour 
the agreement and the agreement itself does not address the causes and 
consequences of the violence.91
The Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers 
recommended that international human rights law should be the starting 
point, taking traditional justice systems into account, but regarding them 
as having validity only insofar as their principles and practices conform to 
international standards (A/HRC/4/25).
90  Ibid., pp. 68–78.
91  Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Access to Justice for Women Victims of 
Sexual Violence in Mesoamerica  (OEA/Ser.L/V/II. Doc. 63), para. 269.
117
 
V. THE HUMAN RIGHTS FRAMEWORK IN PRACTICE117
Some good practices that have increased women’s access to justice 
have been so-called one-stop shops. They integrate services and offer 
women victims everything from health care and counselling to legal aid 
and collection of evidence in one place, reducing barriers and cost. 
Specialized and mobile courts are another successful example of how 
women’s access to justice can be improved in practice. These courts can 
bring justice closer to victims, especially women living in remote areas, to 
address issues such as gender-based violence effectively.92
Increased representation of women within the police and the judicial 
system as well as mainstreaming gender within the judiciary can also 
improve their responsiveness to gender issues and make it easier for 
women to seek assistance or report their cases.
92  See Progress of the World’s Women 2011–2012 , pp. 56–59.
Women’s 
Rights are 
Human  
Rights
Women’s Rights are Human RightsDesigned and Printed at United Nations, Geneva
1404379 (E) – November 2014 – 3,350 – HR/PUB/14/2
United Nations publication
Sales No. E.14.XIV.5  
ISBN 978-92-1-1 54206-6

