CONVENTION ON THE 
ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN (CEDAW) FOR YOUTH
CONVENTION ON THE 
ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN (CEDAW)FOR YOUTH
WRITTEN BY POOJA KHANNA AND  ZACHARY KIMMEL WITH RAVI KARKARA
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youthiii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
WHAT IS THE CONVENTION ON THE  
ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF  
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN?   1
Why is CEDAW Important? 2
CEDAW and You(th) 2
CEDAW’s Impact  4
CEDAW and the Sustainable Development Goals 5 
         
        CEDAW in Brief 6 
ARTICLES OF THE CONVENTION  7 
YOUTH-FRIENDLY SUMMARY OF THE  
CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF  
ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
WOMEN (CEDAW) 14
 
 
        Sources 15
Acknowledgments 15

convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth1
WHAT IS THE CONVENTION 
ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL 
FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION 
AGAINST WOMEN?
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women,  or CEDAW , is an international legal instrument that requires coun -
tries to eliminate discrimination against women in all areas and promotes women’s equal rights. CEDAW is often described as the international bill of 
rights for women.
 
 
 
 
The United Nations adopted CEDAW on 18 December 1979.  As of 2016, 1891 countries have ratified 
CEDAW . This means that these countries have agreed to do everything they can to guarantee that 
women and girls can enjoy their rights on an equal basis with men and boys.
1   https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV-8&chapter=4&clang=_en

convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth2
WHY IS CEDAW IMPORTANT?
CEDAW is a convention or treaty, 
which means that it is part of inter -
national law and is legally binding for countries that have ratified the 
convention.
Although other international hu-
man rights instruments, such as the 
International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, prohibit discrimina-tion on the basis of sex, CEDAW is 
important because it comprehensive-
ly addresses women’s human rights and is focused on ending all forms of 
discrimination against women and 
girls, and guaranteeing their rights in 
all areas of life.
CEDAW requires countries to eliminate discrimi-
nation against women in the public as well as 
the private sphere, including in the family, and 
recognizes that traditional gender roles and ste-
reotypes must be eliminated in order to end all 
forms of discrimination against women and girls.
CEDAW seeks to achieve ‘substantive equality’ 
or ‘equality of results’, which stresses that there 
should be equal access, equal opportunities, and 
equal results for women and girls. It entails that 
countries are obligated to take all necessary ac-
tions that may be required to make sure women 
and girls actually experience equality in their lives.
CEDAW AND YOU(TH)
CEDAW is important for all the above reasons, and it is also im-
portant for youth! Although CEDAW mainly refers to ‘women’, the 
Convention reflects a life cycle approach and countries are obliged to promote the equal rights of women and girls. The different 
AS OF 2016, 1891 
COUNTRIES HAVE 
RATIFIED CEDAW.“THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF WOMEN 
AND THE GIRL-CHILD ARE AN INALIENABLE, INTEGRAL AND INDIVISIBLE PART OF 
UNIVERSAL HUMAN RIGHTS.”
— Vienna Declaration and Programme  
of Action, 1993, paragraph 18 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth3
forms and areas of discrimination that CEDAW 
focuses on are important to women of all ages, 
including girls and young women.
As activists and members of civil society organiza-
tions, as well as simply members of society, young 
women and young men also have an extremely important role to play in holding their govern-
ments accountable to implementing CEDAW. 
Young women and young men are the eyes and ears for monitoring whether women’s and girls’ 
rights are being respected or if they are being violated. In countries that have not yet ratified 
CEDAW and/or its Optional Protocol, advocating for ratification is the first step! 
For countries that have ratified CEDAW, local 
and/or national NGOs (including youth groups)  
can contribute to the country’s official initial and 
periodic reports on the progress that has been made 
in implementing CEDAW and draw attention to 
challenges and suggest ways that government can 
advance women’s and girls’ rights in line with the 
Convention. The Committee on the Elimination of Dis-
crimination against Women (the CEDAW Committee), 
which is composed of 23 independent experts from all 
regions, receives and considers the reports and moni-
tors the implementation of CEDAW. CEDAW IS IMPORTANT 
BECAUSE IT COMPREHENSIVELY ADDRESSES WOMEN’S HUMAN RIGHTS... 
YOUNG WOMEN AND YOUNG MEN ARE THE EYES AND EARS FOR MONITORING WHETHER WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS ARE BEING 
RESPECTED OR IF THEY 
ARE BEING VIOLATED. 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth4
NGOs can also submit ‘alternative reports’ to the 
CEDAW Committee, showing the gaps and chal-
lenges in implementing CEDAW that may not be 
mentioned in their country’s official report. Young women and young men can use the recom-
mendations issued by the CEDAW Committee following the consideration of a country’s report, 
the concluding observations, to lobby the government to take action along the lines of the Com-
mittee’s recommendations to initiate legal and policy reforms. 
Women and girls (alone or in a group) can also make a complaint to the CEDAW Committee if their 
rights have been violated, provided their country has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention. 
Young women and young men can contribute to gender 
equality by learning about women’s and girl’s rights, being 
aware of stereotypes that contribute to women and girls being 
treated unequally, and by addressing discrimination in all of its 
forms and promoting equality, inclusion and respect.
CEDAW’S IMPACT
CEDAW has been a key tool for advancing women’s rights and gender equality around the world, providing the basis for 
judicial decisions, and constitutional, legal and policy reforms 
at the country level.  
In many countries, CEDAW has helped strengthen provisions 
in constitutions guaranteeing equality between women and 
men, and providing a constitutional basis for the protection of 
women’s human rights. Legislation prohibiting discrimination 
in general, and in regard to specific areas such as employment, has become a standard component of legal frameworks. 
Countries have repealed discriminatory provisions in civil, YOUNG WOMEN AND 
YOUNG MEN CAN CONTRIBUTE TO GENDER EQUALITY BY LEARNING ABOUT WOMEN’S AND GIRL’S RIGHTS.
THE CEDAW PROCESS IS A ROADMAP FOR TRANSFORMING GENDER RELATIONS WITHIN COUNTRIES, COMMUNITIES AND FAMILIES SO THAT 
THERE IS EQUALITY IN 
REAL LIFE.
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth5
penal and family laws to bring them into conformity with 
CEDAW. Countries have adopted equal opportunity acts 
aimed at improving women’s position, established quotas 
to increase the number of women in elected office, and 
enacted new legislation and action plans to prevent and 
address violence against women. All over the world, courts 
are increasingly developing case law on gender equality 
informed and guided by CEDAW. 
Because of CEDAW, women and girls around the world 
have been empowered to claim their human rights.
CEDAW AND THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
At the United Nations in 2015, world leaders formally adopted a new agenda for sustainable development with goals and targets for the next 15 years with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The standalone goal for gender 
equality, SDG 5, focuses on achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls, and in-
cludes ending all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere as its first target. 
Gender equality has been recognized as a prerequisite for achieving sustainable development and is 
connected to all the other SDGs. With the SDGs and CEDAW, world leaders have the human rights 
foundation, the commitments and the mechanisms for implementation and accountability, and the timeline for achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and ending all forms of discrimination.BECAUSE OF CEDAW, 
WOMEN AND GIRLS AROUND THE WORLD HAVE BEEN EMPOWERED TO CLAIM THEIR HUMAN RIGHTS.
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth6
CEDAW IN BRIEF
The Convention includes, in a single legally 
binding instrument, provisions requiring the 
elimination of discrimination on the basis of sex 
in the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, so-
cial and cultural rights. It covers the spectrum of 
human rights across the lifespan of women and girls, from education to employment to health, from 
political participation to family life, from issues such 
as trafficking to the situation of rural women, and 
from laws to policy measures. It identifies areas 
of discrimination that are of particular concern 
to women and girls and establishes the means to eliminate discrimination in these areas. The CEDAW 
process is a roadmap for transforming gender rela-
tions within countries, communities and families so 
that there is equality in real life.
CEDAW includes 30 articles which ratifying countries are obliged to undertake. Articles 1 to 4 
outline the nature and scope of what countries commit to do to promote equal rights and end 
discrimination against women and girls. Articles 5 to 16 outline specific forms of discrimination 
that must be ended, such as discrimination in education and employment, health care, and po-litical and public life. Articles 17 to 
30 describe the processes through 
which CEDAW is implemented and 
how this is monitored, such as how 
countries are required to report on 
their progress every four years.THE CONVENTION INCLUDES, 
IN A SINGLE LEGALLY BINDING INSTRUMENT, PROVISIONS REQUIRING THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF SEX IN THE 
ENJOYMENT OF CIVIL, 
POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL 
AND CULTURAL RIGHTS.
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth7
ARTICLE 1
Definition of Discrimination against 
Women and Girls  
Discrimination against women and girls 
means different treatment from men and 
boys that prevents them from enjoying 
their human rights. CEDAW explains that 
discrimination can take place in all areas of 
public and private life, including political, economic, civil, social, and cultural areas. An 
example of “direct discrimination” is when 
the laws of a country do not allow women 
to vote, go to school or own property. 
An example of “indirect discrimination” 
is when a job, such as police officer, has 
minimum height and/or weight criteria 
that many women may not be able to meet. 
‘Substantive equality’ or ‘equality of results’ 
cannot be achieved when either direct or 
indirect discrimination exist. 
ARTICLE 2
Obligations to Eliminate Discrimination 
Countries that have ratified CEDAW are obligated to take action to end discrimina-
tion against women and girls in all its 
forms. This includes establishing laws and 
policies to protect women and girls against 
discrimination and abolishing all existing 
laws, policies, customs, and practices which 
are discriminatory. CEDAW also states that 
constitutions or other national laws must 
include the principle of equality of women 
and girls and men and boys.  ARTICLE 3
Appropriate Measures  
By ratifying CEDAW, countries must take all 
appropriate measures to guarantee that 
women and girls can enjoy their human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in every 
aspect of society, including in the political, 
economic, social, and cultural fields. 
ARTICLE 4
Temporary Special Measures
In fields where women and girls are disadvan-taged by long-standing inequalities, countries 
should adopt temporary special measures to 
bring about substantive equality faster. An ex -
ample of a temporary special measure could be setting quotas for women in politics. These 
are temporary measures used to accelerate 
progress towards gender equality and used 
only until gender equality is achieved. These 
measures are not considered discriminatory 
against men and boys and should last for as 
long as inequalities exist. ARTICLES OF THE CONVENTION

convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth8
ARTICLE 5
Gender Stereotypes  
Countries must work to change harmful 
gender stereotypes about women and 
girls and men and boys that perpetuate 
discrimination and limit opportunities 
for women and girls to achieve their full 
potential. Such stereotypes may include 
a belief that women and girls should not 
play sports or that men and boys should 
not do household work. Countries must 
also ensure that family education includes 
a proper understanding of maternity as a 
social function and the shared responsibil-ity of both men and women in bringing up 
children. 
 ARTICLE 6
Trafficking and Exploitation  
of Prostitution
Countries must end the exploitation of 
prostitution and trafficking in women and 
girls. Around the world, women and girls 
continue to be trafficked and exploited for 
low-paid work or sex. 
ARTICLE 7
Political and Public Life
Countries must eliminate discrimination 
against women and girls in political and 
public life. This includes equal rights to vote, 
to run for and hold public office, to partici-
pate in political parties and processes, and 
to participate in non-governmental organi-
zations and political and public associations 
such as trade unions.

convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth9
ARTICLE 8
Participation at International Level
Countries must ensure that women and 
girls have equal rights to represent their 
country at the international level and to 
participate in the work of international 
organizations, such as the United Nations.
ARTICLE 9
Nationality
Countries must guarantee that women have 
equal rights with men to acquire, retain or 
change their nationality, and the national-
ity of their children. Countries must allow 
women to pass their nationality to their 
foreign spouses on an equal basis with men.ARTICLE 10
Education
Countries must end discrimination against women and girls and ensure equal rights in 
education. This includes equal access to edu-
cation and vocational training at all levels. 
Women and girls must be provided with the 
same curricula, examinations, standards for 
teaching, access to scholarships, and equip-
ment. Ending discrimination against women 
and girls in education includes the right to 
participate in sports and physical education 
and the right to access health education 
and family planning information. Countries should address factors that contribute to 
school drop-out for women and girls, and 
should help women and girls who have left 
school early to return and complete their 
education. Lastly, countries should eliminate 
gender stereotypes and discrimination in 
schools, including by revising textbooks, 
curricula, and teaching methods. 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth10
ARTICLE 11
Employment
Countries must eliminate discrimination 
against women in employment. This 
includes ensuring equal opportunities 
to choose one’s profession and receive 
equal pay for work of equal value. Women 
should have equal access to healthy 
and safe working conditions and social 
security for retirement, unemployment, 
sickness and old age, and should not be 
discriminated against because they are 
married, pregnant, just had a child or are 
looking after children. Women should be provided with maternity leave and 
countries should encourage the provision 
of support to enable parents to combine 
work and family responsibilities. Special 
protection needs to be provided to 
women during pregnancy in types of work 
proved to be harmful to them.ARTICLE 12
Health Care and Family Planning
Countries must guarantee equal access to health care and ensure women and girls 
are not discriminated against in health 
care. Women and girls must have access 
to health care services for family planning. 
Countries should also provide appropriate, 
and where necessary, free services with 
regard to pregnancy, confinement and 
the post-natal period. They should also be 
provided with adequate nutrition during 
pregnancy and lactation.  
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth11
ARTICLE 13
Economic and Social Life
Countries must eliminate discrimination 
against women and girls in all areas of 
economic and social life. Women and girls 
should be granted the same rights as men 
and boys to family benefits, bank loans, 
credit and mortgages, and should have 
equal opportunities to take part in sports 
and other cultural activities.ARTICLE 14
Rural Women and Girls
Countries must take account of the specific problems faced by and important role that 
rural women and girls play in the survival 
of their families. All the obligations in the 
Convention should be applied to rural 
women and girls, and countries should 
ensure that they benefit from rural develop-
ment on an equal footing as men and boys. 
The particular needs of women and girls in 
rural communities must be met in relation 
to access to services, training, and employ -
ment opportunities and social equity 
schemes, and countries need to eliminate 
the discriminatory barriers against rural 
women and girls. This is a unique provision 
dedicated to rural women in an interna-
tional treaty. 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth12
ARTICLE 15
Equality before the Law 
Countries must guarantee women and girls 
equality with men and boys before the law.  
This includes equal access to legal counsel, 
services, and resources. This includes that 
women (and girls when they reach a certain 
age in their country) should have the 
same rights as men and boys to speak for 
themselves in courts or tribunals, get a loan, 
rent and inherit property, or sign a contract. 
Countries must also guarantee the same 
rights to freedom of movement and choice 
of residence to women and men.
ARTICLE 16
Marriage and Family Life
In terms of marriage and family relations, countries must ensure that women have 
equal rights as men in their choice of 
whom to marry and whether to marry, and 
any matters relating to the birth, adop-
tion, and raising of children,  such as the 
spacing and number of children. They also 
have the same rights and responsibilities 
within marriage and in the case of divorce. 
Women have the same personal rights as 
spouses, including with regard to choice 
of family name, profession and occupa-tion and with respect to their property. 
The marriage of a child has no legal effect 
and countries should take steps to set a 
minimum age for marriage. Additionally, all 
marriages must be registered. ARTICLES 17 TO 22
These articles detail how the CEDAW Committee works. Countries submit an ini-
tial report within one year of the country’s 
ratification of the Convention and its entry 
into force, and thereafter a periodic report 
every four years. The Committee holds 
a constructive dialogue with a country’s 
delegation based on the report and other 
information received, including from NGOs. 
NGO representatives, including from youth 
organizations, can also travel to Geneva, 
where the Committee holds its sessions three times a year, and interact with the 
Committee members directly. The CEDAW 
Committee will raise concerns and make 
recommendations to speed up progress 
based on the report and the dialogue 
in the concluding observations. The 
Committee can also adopt general recom-
mendations on thematic or other issues. 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth13
ARTICLES 23 TO 30
These articles deal with the administra-
tion of CEDAW, including the possibility 
to accept CEDAW subject to reservations 
and how to resolve any disputes between 
countries concerning the interpretation or 
application of CEDAW.
OPTIONAL PROTOCOL 
Lastly, CEDAW has an Optional Protocol that came into force in 2000. As of 2016, 
108
2 countries have signed on to the 
Optional Protocol. 
The Optional Protocol is a procedural 
protocol which introduces additional 
mechanisms for the implementation of 
CEDAW. The Optional Protocol allows 
women and girls (alone or in a group) to submit complaints directly to the CEDAW 
Committee if they consider their human rights protected by CEDAW are violated,  
and the CEDAW Committee can provide redress. The Optional Protocol also estab -
lishes an inquiry procedure enabling the CEDAW Committee to address systematic 
and widespread violations, which may 
be instigated on the basis of information 
received from any source. 
2   https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-8-b&chapter=4&clang=_en
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, or CEDAW, is an international 
legal instrument that requires countries to eliminate discrimination against women in all areas and promotes 
women’s equal rights. CEDAW is often described as the international bill of rights for women. The United Na-
tions adopted CEDAW on 18 December 1979. As of 2016, 189 countries have ratified CEDAW. 
Article 1  Definition of Discrimination against Women and Girls:  
Discrimination against women and girls means different treat -
ment from men and boys that prevents them from enjoying their 
human rights. It includes both direct and indirect discrimination.
Article 2  Obligations to Eliminate Discrimination: Countries are 
obligated to take action to end discrimination against women 
and girls in all its forms, by establishing laws and policies to 
protect women and girls from discrimination and including the principle of equality in constitutions and other national laws.
Article 3  Appropriate Measures: Countries must take all 
appropriate measures to guarantee that women and girls can 
enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms in every aspect of society.
Article 4  Temporary Special Measures: Countries should adopt 
temporary special measures to accelerate progress towards 
gender equality and end discrimination and women and girls.
Article 5  Gender Stereotypes: Countries must work to change 
harmful gender stereotypes about women and girls and men 
and boys that perpetuate discrimination and limit opportunities 
for women and girls to achieve their full potential.
Article 6  Trafficking and Exploitation of Prostitution: Countries 
must end the exploitation of prostitution and trafficking in 
women and girls. 
Article 7  Political and Public Life: Countries must eliminate 
discrimination against women and girls in political and public life. Article 8  Participation at International Level: Countries must 
ensure that women and girls have equal rights to represent 
their country at the international level and to participate in the 
work of international organizations.
Article 9  Nationality: Countries must guarantee that women 
have equal rights with men to acquire, retain or change their 
nationality, and the nationality of their children. Countries must allow women to pass their nationality to their foreign spouses 
on an equal basis with men.
Article 10  Education: Countries must end discrimination against 
women and girls and ensure equal rights in education. Article 11  Employment: Countries must eliminate discrimina-tion against women in employment, including ensuring equal 
opportunities to choose one’s profession and receive equal pay 
for work of equal value.
Article 12  Health Care and Family Planning: Countries must 
guarantee equal access to health care and ensure women and 
girls are not discriminated against in health care and have access to services for family planning and reproductive health. 
Article 13  Economic and Social Life: Countries must eliminate 
discrimination against women and girls in economic and 
social life.
Article 14  Rural Women and Girls: Countries must take account 
of the specific problems and important role that rural women 
and girls play in the survival of their families.
Article 15  Equality before the Law: Countries must guarantee 
women and girls equality with men and boys before the law, including equal access to legal counsel, services, and resources.
Article 16  Marriage and Family Life: Countries must eliminate 
discrimination against women in marriage and family relations. 
Countries must ensure that women have equal rights as men in 
their choice of whom to marry and whether to marry, and any 
matters relating to the birth, adoption, and raising of children. The marriage of a child has no legal effect and countries should 
take steps to set a minimum age for marriage. 
Articles 17 to 22  These articles detail how the CEDAW Committee 
works, including its role in monitoring the implementation of 
CEDAW in countries that have ratified CEDAW.
Articles 23 to 30  These articles deal with the administration of 
CEDAW.
Optional Protocol   The Optional Protocol introduces additional 
mechanisms for the implementation of CEDAW, including an inquiry procedure for the CEDAW Committee to address 
systematic violations and a way for women and girls to submit 
complaints directly to the CEDAW Committee if they consider their human rights protected by CEDAW are violated.
CEDAW IN BRIEFIN BRIEF
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth15
SOURCES
Adapted from the Convention on the Elimina-
tion of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women (CEDAW), Full text of the Convention 
in English: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/
daw/cedaw/
Adapted from CEDAW In Brief - For Adoles-
cents by UNICEF: http://www.unicef.org/
gender/files/CEDAW_In_Brief_For_Adoles-
cent-Web_Version.pdf
CEDAW Made Easy Question and 
Answer Booklet by UN Women Carib -
bean: http://caribbean.unwomen.org/
en/materials/publications/2004/12/
cedaw-made-easy-question-answer-booklet  
CEDAW and Human Rights by UN Women 
Asia Pacific: http://asiapacific.unwomen.org/
en/focus-areas/cedaw-human-rights
Confronting Discrimination: The Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women and its 
Optional Protocol, Handbook for Parlia-mentarians by the United Nations Division 
for the Advancement of Women and 
the Inter-Parliamentary Union: http://
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/public/
handbook_parliamentarians_cedaw_en.pdfACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely appreciate the vision, inspiration and support of Phumzile 
Mlambo-Ngcuka, UN Under-Secretary-Gen-
eral and Executive Director of UN Women 
and Lakshmi Puri, UN Assistant Secretary-
General and Deputy Executive Director of UN 
Women. Their forward outlook and strong 
advocacy for the inclusion of youth in the 
gender equality agenda provided the original 
thrust and continues to drive our work.
Thank you to Allyson Humphrey, Jason Tan 
de Bibiana, Rhonda De-Freitas, and Patricia 
Cortes for their contributions to the docu-
ment and Beatrice Duncan, Carlotta Aiello, 
Carolin Schleker, and Janette Amer for their 
inputs and review of the document. 
We would also like to thank all the members 
of the UN Inter-Agency Network on Youth 
Development’s Working Group on Youth 
and Gender Equality for their support. We 
acknowledge the contributions of Frida 
Abildgaard, Richard Castillo, and Shruti 
Kapoor and thank Christian Porter, Molly Pacheco, and Veeha Vohra for reviewing the 
final version of the document.
The publication of this document was made 
possible thanks to the contributions of Adobe.

convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth16
PHOTO CREDITS Cover: UN Women/Ryan Brown; Table of Contents: UN Women/Pathumporn Thongking; 
Page 1: Women in Development Korçe NGO; Page 2: MHPV; Page 3: UN Women/Stephanie Raison; Page 4: 
UN Women/Gustavo Stephan; Page 5: Faria Salman; Page 6: UN Women Moldova/Diana Savina; Page 7: UN 
Women/Ryan Brown; Page 8: Jaco Roets; Page 9: UN Women/Ryan Brown; Page 10: UN Women/Gustavo 
Stephan; Page 11: Grassroots Soccer/Karin Schermbrucker; Page 12: UN Women Albania/Violana Murataj; Page 
13, Top: UN Women Tanzania/Deepika Nath; Bottom: UNTF/Phil Borges; Page 15: UN RCO Maldives/Lara L. Hill. 
convention on the elimination of all forms of violence against women for youth17
220 East 42nd Street
New York, New York 10017, USA
Tel: 646-781-4400
Fax: 646-781-4444
www.unwomen.org
www.facebook.com/unwomen
www.twitter.com/un_women
www.youtube.com/unwomen
www.flickr.com/unwomen
youth@unwomen.org 
www.twitter.com/unwomen4youth
#Youth4GenderEquality
