
© 2015 United Nations  
All rights reserved worldwide
Illustrations by Yacine Ait Kaci (YAK)
This illustrated edition of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR)  is published by the United Nations  in Arabic, Chinese, English, 
French, Russian, and Spanish.
This illustrated edition of the UDHR was created and designed in a 
partnership between the artist Yacin e Ait Kaci (YAK) creator of Elyx, 
the United Nations Regional information Centre (UNRIC),  and the 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights - Regional Office for Europe (OHCHR).
This illustrated edition of the UDHR may be reproduced and/or trans
-
lated in whole or in part without prior permission provided that it be 
distributed at no cost (free distribution). Publishers are required to 
remove the United Nations emblem from their edition and include 
proper credits.  Translations must bear the following disclaimer: “The present work is an unofficial translation for which the publisher accepts full responsibility.”
All requests to sell excerpts, photocopies, reprints, translations 
of this illustrated edition of the UDHR should be addressed to 
 
permissions@un.org.
The drawings by YAK included in this illustrated edition of the UDHR 
are protected by copyright and can only be reproduced to illustrate the text of the UDHR.

UNITED
NATIONSiii
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | ForewordThe Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
remains as relevant today as it was on the day in 1948 that it was proclaimed and adopted by the United Nations General Assembly. The extraordi
-
nary vision and resolve of the drafters produced a document that, for the first time, articulated the rights and freedoms to which every human being is equally and inalienably entitled. 
 Now available in more than 360 languages, the 
Declaration is the most translated document in 
the world — a testament to its global nature and 
reach. It has become a yardstick by which we 
measure right and wrong. It provides a founda
-
tion for a just and decent future for all, and has 
given people everywhere a powerful tool in the fight against oppression, impunity and affronts   to human dignity.
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | ivUNITED
NATIONS
 The commitment of the United Nations  to 
human rights stems from the Organization’s 
founding Charter. The international community has a duty to uphold and defend these rights. Let us ensure that those people who most need their rights protected are made aware that this Decla
-
ration exists — and that it exists for them. Let us each do our part to make these universal rights a living reality for every man, woman and child, everywhere.
BAN Ki-moon
Secretary-General
Foreword
UNITED
NATIONSv
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | In perhaps the most resonant and beautiful 
words of any international agreement, “all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights”. The commitments made by all States in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are in themselves a mighty achievement, discredit
-
ing the tyranny, discrimination and contempt for human beings that have marked human history.  
 The Universal Declaration promises to all the 
economic, social, political, cultural and civic 
rights that underpin a life free from want and 
fear. They are not a reward for good behaviour. 
They are not country-specific, or particular to 
 
a certain era or social group.  They are the inalien -
able entitlements of all people, at all times, and in all places — people of every colour, from every race and ethnic group; whether or not they are Introduction
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | viUNITED
NATIONS
disabled; citizens or migrants; no matter their sex, 
their class, their caste, their creed, their age or sexual orientation.
 Human rights abuses did not end when the Univer
-
sal Declaration was adopted. But since then, count -
less people have gained greater freedom. Violations 
have been prevented; independence and autonomy have been attained. Many people – though not all – have been able to secure freedom from torture, unjustified imprisonment, summary  execution, enforced disappearance, persecution and unjust discrimination, as well as fair access to education, economic opportunities, and adequate resources and health-care. They have obtained justice for 
wrongs, and national and international protection 
for their rights, through the strong architecture of the international human rights legal system. 
Introduction
UNITED
NATIONSvii
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights |  The power of the Universal Declaration is the 
power of ideas to change the world. It inspires 
us to continue working to ensure that all people can gain freedom, equality and dignity. One vital aspect of this task is to empower people to demand what should be guaranteed: their human rights. This booklet constitutes a modest but significant contribution to that work.
Introduction
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights


UNITED
NATIONS1
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | Whereas  recognition of the inherent dignity and 
of the equal and inalienable rights of all members 
of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas  disregard and contempt for human 
rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have 
outraged the  conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the 
highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas  it is essential, if man is not to be compelled 
to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against 
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,PreambleUniversal 
Declaration of
Human Rights
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 2UNITED
NATIONS
Universal 
Declaration ofHuman Rights
Whereas  it is essential to promote the develop -
ment of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas  the peoples of the United Nations have in 
the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental 
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas  Member States have pledged themselves 
to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, 
the promotion of universal respect for and obser
-
vance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas  a common understanding of these rights 
and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the 
full realization of this pledge,  
UNITED
NATIONS3
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 
Now, therefore,
The General Assembly
proclaims
this Universal Declaration of Human Rights
as a common standard of achievement for all 
peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member 
States themselves and among the peoples of 
 
territories under their jurisdiction.
Universal 
Declaration of
Human Rights
| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 4
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
All human beings are born free and 
equal in dignity and rights. They are 
endowed with reason and conscience 
and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 6
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
02Everyone is entitled to all the rights and 
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, 
without distinction of any kind, such as 
race, colour, sex, language, religion, poli-  
tical or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. 
 
Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, juris
-
dictional or  international status of the country or territory to which a person 
belongs, whether it be independent, 
trust, non-self-governing or under any 
other limitation of sovereignty.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 8
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to life, 
liberty and security of person.03

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 10
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
No one shall be held in slavery  or  
servitude; slavery and the slave trade 
shall be prohibited in all their forms. 04

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 12
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
No one shall be subjected to torture or to 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment 
or punishment. 05

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 14
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to recognition 
everywhere as a person before the law.06

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 16
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
All are equal before the law and are 
entitled  without any  discrimination 
to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to  equal protection against any discrimination in violation of this 
Declaration and against any incitement 
to such discrimination.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 18
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to an effective 
remedy by the competent national tribu -
nals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the consti  tution 
or by law. 08

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 20
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
No one shall be subjected to 
arbitrary arrest,  detention or exile. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 22
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone is entitled in full equality to    
a fair and public hearing by an indepen -
dent and  impartial  tribunal, in the deter -
mination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 24
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone charged with a penal  
offence has the right to be presumed 
innocent until proved guilty according 
to law in a public trial at which he has 
had all the guarantees necessary for his defence. 
(2) No one shall be held guilty of any 
penal offence on account of any act or 
omission which did not constitute a penal 
offence, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed. 
Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed 
than the one that was applicable at the time the penal offence was committed.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 26
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary 
interference with his privacy, family, 
home or correspondence, nor to attacks 
upon his honour and reputation. Every -
one has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 28
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom 
of movement and residence within the 
borders of each State. 
(2)  Everyone has the right to leave any 
country, including his own, and to 
return to his country.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 30
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to seek and 
to enjoy in other countries asylum from 
persecution. 
(2) This right may not be invoked in the 
case of prosecutions genuinely arising 
from non-political crimes or from acts 
contrary to the purposes and principles 
of the United Nations.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 32
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to a nationality. 
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived 
of his nationality nor denied the right to 
change his  nationality.

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 34
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Men and women of full age, without 
any  limitation due to race, nationality 
or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during 
 marriage and at its dissolution. 
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only 
with the free and full consent of the 
intending spouses. 
(3) The family is the natural and funda
-
mental group unit of society and is enti -
tled to protection by society and the State. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 36
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to own   
property alone as well as in associa -
tion with others. 
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived 
of his property. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 38
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to freedom of 
thought,  conscience and religion; this 
right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and 
in public or private, to manifest his 
religion or belief in teaching, practice, 
worship and observance. 8

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 40
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression; this right 
includes freedom to hold opinions with -
out interference and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas through 
any media and regardless of frontiers. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 42
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom    
of peaceful assembly and association. 
(2) No one may be compelled to belong 
to an association.20

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 44
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to take part in 
the  government of his country, directly 
or through freely chosen representatives. 
(2) Everyone has the right to equal access 
to public service in his country. 
(3) The will of the people shall be the 
basis of the authority of government; 
this will shall be expressed in periodic 
and genuine elections which shall be by 
universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free 
 voting procedures. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 46
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone, as a member of society, has 
the right to social security and is enti -
tled to realization, through national effort and international cooperation and 
in accordance with the organization and 
resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable 
for his dignity and the free development 
of his personality. 22

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 48
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to work, to 
free choice of employment, to just and 
favourable conditions of work and to 
protection against unemployment. 
(2) Everyone, without  any  discrimi -
nation, has the right to equal pay for 
equal work. 
(3) Everyone who works has the right 
to just  and favourable remuneration 
ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and 
supplemented, if necessary, by other 
means of social protection. 
(4) Everyone has the right to form and 
to join trade unions for the protection of 
his interests. 23

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 50
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone has the right to rest and 
leisure, includ    ing reasonable limitation 
of working hours and periodic holidays with pay. 24

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 52
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to a standard 
of living adequate for the health and 
well-being of himself and of his family, 
including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social 
services, and the right to security in 
the event of unemployment, sickness, 
disability, widowhood, old age or other 
lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control. 
(2) Motherhood and childhood are entitled 
to  special care and assistance. All chil
-
dren, whether born in or out of wedlock, 
shall enjoy the same social protection. 25

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 54
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right to education. 
Education shall be free, at least in the 
elementary and funda  mental stages. 
Elementary education shall be compul -
sory. Technical and professional educa -
tion shall be made generally available 
and higher  education shall be equally 
accessible to all on the basis of merit. 
(2) Education shall be directed to the 
full  development of the human person -
ality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental free
-
doms. It shall promote  understanding, 
tolerance and friendship among all 
nations, racial or religious groups, and 
shall  further the activities of the United 
Nations for the maintenance of peace. 
(3) Parents have a prior right to choose 
the kind of education that shall be given to their children.26

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 56
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has the right freely to 
participate in the cultural life of the 
community, to enjoy the arts and to 
share in scientific advancement and its benefits. 
(2) Everyone has the right to the 
protection of the moral and material 
interests resulting from any  scientific, 
literary or artistic production of which 
he is the author. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 58
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Everyone is entitled to a social and 
international order in which the rights 
and freedoms set forth in this Declara -
tion can be fully realized. 28

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 60
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
(1) Everyone has duties to the community 
in which alone the free and full develop -
ment of his personality is possible. 
(2) In the exercise of his rights and free -
doms,  everyone shall be subject only to 
such limitations as are determined by 
law solely for the purpose of securing 
due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of 
meeting the just requirements of moral
-
ity, public order and the general welfare 
in a democratic society. 
(3) These rights and freedoms may in no 
case be exercised contrary to the purposes 
and principles of the United Nations. 

| Universal Declaration of Human Rights | 62
ArticleUNITED
NATIONS
Nothing in this Declaration may be 
interpreted as implying for any State, 
group or person any right to engage in 
any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights 
and freedoms set forth herein.30

